
Draft Interoperability Program Report - Viewpoint Specification OGC 03-063r1

 

 

 

Open GIS Consortium Inc.  
Date:   2003-06-02 

Reference number of this OpenGIS© Project Document:    OGC 03-063r1 

Version: 0.5.0 

Category: OpenGIS© OGC Interoperability Program Report -Viewpoint Specification 

Editors:   Joshua Lieberman (Syncline Inc.)  

Critical Infrastructure Collaborative Environment Architecture: 

Computational Viewpoint 

 

 

 

Copyright notice 

This OGC document is copyright-protected by OGC. While the reproduction of drafts in 
any form for use by participants in the OGC Interoperability Program is permitted without 
prior permission from OGC, neither this document nor any extract from it may be 
reproduced, stored or transmitted in any form for any other purpose without prior written 
permission from OGC. 

 



03-063r1 

Warning 

This document is not an OGC Standard or Specification. This document presents a 
discussion of technology issues considered in an Interoperability Initiative of the OGC 
Interoperability Program. The content of this document is presented to create discussion in 
the geospatial information industry on this topic; the content of this document is not to be 
considered an adopted specification of any kind. This document does not represent the 
official position of the OGC nor of the OGC Technical Committee.  It is subject to change 
without notice and may not be referred to as an OGC Standard or Specification. However, 
the discussions in this document could very well lead to the definition of an OGC 
Implementation Specification. 

Recipients of this document are invited to submit, with their comments, notification of any 
relevant patent rights of which they are aware and to provide supporting documentation. 

Document type:    OpenGIS© Draft Interoperability Program Report -Viewpoint Specification 
Document subtype:    OGC Critical Infrastructure Protection Initiative (CIPI) 
Document stage:    Draft 
Document language:  English 



03-063r1 

Contents 

i. Preface .................................................................................................................... 4 

ii. Document Contributor Contact Points ............................................................... 4 

iii. Revision history ..................................................................................................... 5 

1 Introduction ........................................................................................................... 6 
1.1 Scope....................................................................................................................... 6 
1.2 Conformance.......................................................................................................... 6 
1.3 Normative references ............................................................................................ 6 
1.4 Terms and definitions ........................................................................................... 7 
1.5 Policy ...................................................................................................................... 7 
1.6 Conventions............................................................................................................ 7 
1.6.1 Symbols and abbreviated terms........................................................................... 7 
1.6.2 Requirement levels ................................................................................................ 7 

2 CICE Computational Viewpoint.......................................................................... 8 
2.1 Service-oriented architecture ............................................................................... 8 
2.2 CICE Services Framework................................................................................. 10 
2.2.1 Human Interaction Services............................................................................... 11 
2.2.2 Registry Services ................................................................................................. 13 
2.2.3 Processing Services.............................................................................................. 14 
2.2.4 Portrayal Services ............................................................................................... 15 
2.2.5 Data Services........................................................................................................ 16 
2.3 Information Security........................................................................................... 17 
2.3.1 Registration Authority........................................................................................ 17 
2.3.2 Certificate Authority........................................................................................... 18 
2.3.3 Security Profile Manager.................................................................................... 18 
2.4 CICE Service Interactions.................................................................................. 18 

Bibliography .................................................................................................................... 27 
 



03-063r1 

 

i. Preface 

The Open GIS Consortium (OGC) is an international industry consortium of more than 250 
companies, government agencies, and universities participating in a consensus process to 
develop publicly available geo-processing specifications.  This Draft Interoperability Program 
Report (DIPR) is a product of the OGC Critical Infrastructure Protection Initiative (CIPI), the 
objective of which is to provide a vendor-neutral interoperable framework that enables 
collaborating communities to rapidly and collaboratively publish, discover, integrate and use 
geospatial information concerned with the protection of critical infrastructure systems in a range 
of sectors.  Specifically, this document specifies a Computational Architecture viewpoint for a 
Critical Infrastructure Collaborative Environment (CICE). 

The OGC Critical Infrastructure Protection Initiative is part of the OGC’s Interoperability 
Program: a global, collaborative, hands-on engineering and testing program designed to deliver 
prototype technologies and proven candidate specifications into the OGC’s Specification 
Development Program.  In OGC Interoperability Initiatives, international teams of technology 
providers work together to solve specific geo-processing interoperability problems posed by 
Initiative sponsors. 

ii. Document Contributor Contact Points 

All questions regarding this document should be directed to the editor or the contributors: 

CONTACT COMPANY ADDRESS PHONE/FAX EMAIL 
Joshua 
Lieberman 

Syncline Inc. 373 Washington 
Street, Boston, 
MA 02108 

Tel: 617-603-
2209 Fax: 
617-986-1001 

jlieberman@syn
cline.com 

Henry Han York University 4700 Keele Street, 
Toronto, M3J 2P3 

Tel: 416-736-
2100 x 33482 

hhan@yorku.ca 

Charles 
Heazel 

OGC 483 B Carlisle Dr. 
Herndon, VA 
20170 

703.380.7433 cheazel@opengi
s.org 

John 
Davidson 

Image Matters 105 South King St 
Leesburg, VA 
20175 

703-669-5510 johnd@imagem
attersllc.com 

 



03-063r1 

iii. Revision history 

Date Release Description 
2003-01-17 0.1.0  Template populated with the preliminary table of contents;  
2003-03-09 0.2.0  Updated TOC 
2003-03-13 0.3.0  Added content from RFQ Annex B 
2003-05-19 0.4.0  Revised with new document number 
2003-06-01 0.5.0  Added Section 2.4 CICE Services and Interactions; other misc. 

editorial changes 
    
    
    
    

 

 

 

 

 



03-063r1 

CIPI Computational Viewpoint Specification 

1 Introduction 

ISO RM-ODP (ISO/IEC 10746) is the architectural framework adopted by the OGC for 
specifying its reference architectures. The four main parts of the standard define viewpoints on 
open distributed processing (ODP) systems. This specification addresses the computational 
viewpoint for systems dedicated to the protection of critical infrastructure components; this 
viewpoint is concerned with the kinds of computations handled by the system and modes of 
access for those computations. 

1.1 Scope 

This draft Interoperability Program Report (DIPR) specifies the information viewpoint for the 
Critical Infrastructure Collaborative Environment (CICE). This open, distributed processing 
environment crosses organizational boundaries and includes a variety of components deployed 
within multiple communities. The CICE leverages OGC Web Services to enable: 

 the publication of the availability of critical infrastructure services and data; 
 the registration and categorization of published service and data providers; and 
 the discovery and use of needed critical infrastructure services and data 

Critical infrastructure is a very broad term that encompasses many large-scale systems in a range 
of sectors: energy, telecommunications, transportation, public health services, and more. 
Safeguarding such systems involves a welter of political, economic, and legal issues that will not 
be raised here. Rather, the CICE is more about the creation and maintenance of a common 
information space to support sense-making and decision-making activities on the part of incident 
response teams. 

1.2 Conformance 

Assessing conformance requires consistency across the various viewpoints (i.e. clear mappings 
of concepts) and across the models they define. In general, the set of viewpoint specifications 
should not make mutually contradictory statements. Furthermore, each specification should 
include correspondence statements that relate it to other viewpoints. 

1.3 Normative references 

The following normative documents contain provisions that, through reference in this text, 
constitute provisions of this Interoperability Program Report. For dated references, subsequent 



03-063r1 

amendments to, or revisions of, any of these publications do not apply. However, parties to 
agreements based on this document are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the 
most recent editions of the normative documents indicated below. For undated references, the 
latest edition of the normative document referred to applies. 

ISO/IEC 10746-2:1996, Information Technology – Open Distributed Processing –Reference 
Model: Foundations.  

ISO/IEC 10746-3:1996, Information Technology – Open Distributed Processing –Reference 
Model: Architecture. 

 

1.4 Terms and definitions 

For the purposes of this Interoperability Program Report, the terms and definitions given in ISO 
10746-2 and ISO 10746-3 apply. For convenience, some of these terms are repeated below. 

1.5 Policy 

A set of obligation, prohibition, or permission rules that either constrain or enable actions, as 
related to a purpose. [ISO 10746-2] 

1.6 Conventions 

1.6.1 Symbols and abbreviated terms 

The following symbols and abbreviated terms are used in this document. 

API Application Programming Interface 

OGC OpenGIS Consortium 

XML Extensible Markup Language 

1.6.2 Requirement levels 

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
"SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [1]. 



03-063r1 

2 CICE Computational Viewpoint 

The Critical Infrastructure Collaborative Environment (CICE) Architecture is based on the need 
to enhance the ability of organizations and individuals to use geospatial processing technologies 
in an open distributed processing environment to address issues associated with assuring the 
continuity, viability and protection of a nation’s critical infrastructure.   

This open distributed architecture for CICE is described from four non-overlapping viewpoints:  
Enterprise,  Information, Computational, and Engineering.  This document focuses on the 
Computational perspective.  The computational viewpoint is concerned with how geospatial 
software services plug into broader interoperability infrastructure to use and extend diverse, 
loosely coupled sources of data and services in support of Critical Infrastructure Protection. 
Accordingly, this computation first defines the core concepts of services, interfaces and 
operations (and the relationships amongst these concepts) for Critical Infrastructure Protection, 
and then describes the Publish/Find/Bind pattern that represents the interactions among OGC 
services. The computational viewpoint of the CICE also includes service classification and a 
description of the provided Service Framework.    

2.1 Service-oriented architecture  

A service is a collection of operations, accessible through an interface, which allows a user to 
evoke a behavior of value to the user. Typically, a service can be invoked using standardized 
protocols by a client from across a network independently of the platform, language and object 
model on which it was deployed.  

In the CICE, there are three essential roles:  
• Service Provider - publishes services to a broker (registry) and delivers services to 

service requestors. 

• Service Requestor - performs discovery operations on the service broker to find the 
service providers it needs and then accesses service providers for provision of the desired 
service. 

• Service Registry - helps service providers and service requestors to find each other by 
acting as a clearinghouse of services and content that can be used to discover and broker.  

Figure 1 depicts three basic and one optional operation that occur between requestor, provider 
and registry services. Note that many readers should also recognize Figure 1 as most of the 
recent web services white papers and product literature include similar diagrams that map onto it 
directly. In many cases ‘export’, ‘import’, and ‘service interaction’ substitute for ‘publish’, ‘find’ 
and ‘bind’, respectively. 



03-063r1 

Registry

ProviderRequestor

1. Publish2. Find

3. Bind

Provider

4. Chain

 

Figure 1. Service Types and Operations of the IPSM 

As shown, there are three essential kinds of operations performed by services: 

Publish - The publish (and unpublish) operation is used to advertise (or remove) data and 
services to a broker (e.g., a registry, catalog or clearinghouse). A service provider 
contacts the service broker to publish or unpublish a service. A service provider typically 
publishes metadata to the registry describing, for example, its capabilities and network 
address.  

Find - Service requestors and service brokers collaborate to perform the find operation. 
Service requestors describe the kinds of services they're looking for to the broker and the 
broker delivers the results that match the request. Service requestors typically use 
metadata published to the registry to find service providers of interest.   

Bind - The bind operation takes place between a service requestor and a service provider. 
The two parties negotiate as appropriate so the requestor can access and invoke services 
of the provider. A service requestor typically uses service metadata provided by the 
registry to bind to a service provider. 

And one optional operation: 

Chain - The chain operation binds a sequence of services where, for each adjacent pair of 
services, occurrence of the first action is necessary for the occurrence of the second 
action. 



03-063r1 

The CICE distinguishes between description of service type and service implementation. This 
allows service requesters to bind to a specific implementation of a service provider at 
development time, at deployment time, or dynamically at runtime. The CICE uses service 
descriptions (i.e., metadata about services) to support Publish, Find, Bind and Chain operations. 
Service metadata plays three distinct roles:  

• Metadata specifies the characteristics of a service provider. Service brokers use these 
characteristics to categorize service providers to support the find operation. The 
classification of services can be based on one or more hierarchical service taxonomies. 
Service requesters use these characteristics to match a service provider to their 
requirements.  

• Metadata specifies non-functional characteristics such as security, transactional 
requirements, cost of using the service provider, and others. Non-functional 
characteristics may be used to help a service requester find a service provider. 

Metadata describes the interfaces used to access the service. The interface description includes 
its signature, allowed operations, data typing, and the access protocols. Service requesters use 
this information to bind to the service provider and invoke its services using the published 
interfaces. 

 

2.2 CICE Services Framework 

CICE Services are implementations of services that conform to OpenGIS Implementation 
Specifications. Compliant applications, called OpenGIS Applications, can then "plug into" the 
framework to join the operational environment.  

By building applications to common interfaces, each application can be built without a-priori or 
run-time dependencies on other applications or services. Applications and services can be added, 
modified, or replaced without impacting other applications. In addition, operational workflows 
can be changed on-the-fly, allowing rapid response to time-critical situations. This loosely 
coupled, standards-based approach to development results in very agile systems—systems that 
can be flexibly adapted to changing requirements and technologies 



03-063r1 

 

Map  
Viewer 
Client 

Discovery 
Client 

Terrain  
Viewer 
Client 

Data  
Instance
Registry 

Service  
Instance
Registry 

Data Services Portrayal Services 

Registry Services

Application Clients

= OGC/IP Interface 

Find

Publish Encodings

GML SLD Service 
Metadata

Filter 

Value Add
Client 

XIMA 

Annot-
ation 
Client 

 
WCS

 
CMS

 
WFS  WMS

 
CPS

  

Bind 

 
WOS 

 
GAZ 

Processing Services 

 

Figure 2. Open GIS Service Framework elements for CIPI-1 

The CICE is designed to meet the following purposes: 
• Provide a framework for coordinated development of new and extended services 
• Enable interoperable services through standard interfaces and encodings 
• Support publishing, discovery and binding of services through service metadata  
• Allow separation of data instances from service instances 
• Enable use of a provider’s service on another provider’s data 
• Define a framework that can be implemented in multiple ways  

 

2.2.1 Human Interaction Services 

Critical Infrastructure Protection services are accessible from Application Services operating on 
user terminals (e.g. desktop, notebook, handset, etc.) or servers that have network connectivity. 
Users may use Application Services to access Registry, Portrayal, Processing and Data Services, 
depending upon the requirements and designed implementation of the application. Application 
Services commonly, but not necessarily, provide user-oriented displays of geospatial content and 
support user interaction at the user terminal.   

Note: The Portrayal, Data, and Registry Services described below work on a client/server model.  
In the simplest case, the client can be a standard Web browser.  To be useful, a more robust 
client, capable of building the service requests and processing the responses is desired.  Most 
SCOTS software vendors provide clients for this purpose.  Deploying clients for each service on 



03-063r1 

every users’ workstation, however, would create a management and operations nightmare.  
What is needed is a single client, supporting all of the services, that is easy to manage and 
maintain. 

The Server Based Client addresses this issue.  Server Based Clients combine the client role for 
Web services into a single package.  This package resides on a workgroup server where users 
can access it through their Web browser.  Being server resident, there is only one copy of the 
package that has to be managed and maintained.  Users are presented with a single environment 
that combines all of the Framework functionality and hides from them the underlying complexity. 

While most SCOTS vendors provide Server Side Clients or the components to build one, there is 
no specification for Server Side Clients.  Their design is governed by the OpenGIS® 
specifications they implement and the operational needs of the users.  This frees developers to 
reuse SCOTS components in a way that best meets their needs. 

Discussion of the specific mechanisms for distribution and transparency of interactions between 
application clients and services is discussed in the Engineering Viewpoint. 

Examples of CIPI applications services include: 

2.2.1.1 Web Map View Client 

Relevant Specifications: TBD  
A Web Map Viewer Client can issue GetMap requests for different maps to several independent 
Web Map Servers.  If each map has the same geographic area and physical dimensions, and if 
their backgrounds are transparent, then they can be overlaid in a single window to produce a 
combined map.  For example, server A might produce a topography image, server B a map of 
rivers and lakes, and server C a map of watershed boundaries.  Each server maintains the type of 
data in which it specializes, but the end user can obtain a combined presentation of the three 
Layers. 
2.2.1.2 Terrain Viewer Client 

Relevant Specifications: TBD  
Terrain Viewer Clients are the class of applications that can exploit three dimensional terrain 
data.   Examples of these clients are applications that support cross-country mobility, mission 
planning, and mission rehearsal activities. 
2.2.1.3 Annotation Client 

Relevant Specifications: TBD 
An Annotation Client is an extension of the Map Viewer Client.  Through the Annotation Client, 
users can view map and imagery data, create annotations features for that data, associate the 



03-063r1 

annotations with discrete geographic coordinates, and store the annotations and associations back 
to an Annotation Server.  

2.2.1.4 Discovery Client 

Relevant Specifications: TBD  
A Discovery Client provides the tools to enable the user to build services or data queries, issues 
those queries to the appropriate registry(s) and display the returned result set.  

2.2.1.5 Value Added Client 

Relevant Specifications: TBD   
Value-Add Clients are a class of Application Service specializing in supporting the ability for 
users to collect and submit user input that augments geospatial information originally supplied 
by a data producer. Value-Add Application Services support augmentation of datasets by 
creating new features, and updating or deleting existing features.  Value-Add Application 
Services typically support human interaction controls, the ability to add and remove layers, and 
the ability to create, select, and display cartographic styles to support of the value-adding 
process. Value-Add Application Services may also support the ability to draw on a background 
map and insert this content into a LOF or save updates to repositories and databases using 
OpenGIS Data Services such as WFS and WCS.  

2.2.2 Registry Services 

CIPI registry services provide a common mechanism to classify, register, describe, search, 
maintain and access geospatial information about resources available on a network. Resources 
are network addressable instances of typed data or services. Types of registries are differentiated 
by their role such as registries for cataloging data types, online data instances, service types and 
online service instances. 

2.2.2.1 Catalog Services 

Relevant Specifications: OpenGIS® Catalog Service version 1.1 
The OpenGIS®  Catalog Service Interface Specification defines a common interface that enables 
diverse but conformant applications to perform discovery, browse and query operations against 
distributed and potentially heterogeneous catalog servers.  Spatial Catalog servers typically 
contain metadata about spatially referenced information such as maps, schematics, diagrams, or 
textual documents.  The specification uses metadata and spatial location to identify and select 
layers of interest, and provides for interoperability in catalog update, maintenance, and other 
Librarian functions.  The specification is designed for catalogs of imagery, geospatial 
information, and mixtures of the two. (Future versions of the specification may also support 
services.)  It specifies open APIs that provide discovery services, access services and interfaces 
for catalog managers, including a complete Catalog Query Language.  Detailed implementation 



03-063r1 

guidance is provided for establishing and ending a stateful catalog session to: query the catalog 
server properties, check the status of a request, cancel a request, issue a query, present the query 
results, and get the schema of a discovered collection. 

2.2.2.2 Secure Catalog Services 

Relevant Specifications: OpenGIS® Catalog Service version 1.1 
This class extends the Catalog class by adding Authentication and Identification to the interface, 
and Discretionary Access Controls (DAC) to the data management logic.  All other Catalog 
subclasses can also be subclassed off of the Secure Catalog class. 

2.2.2.3 Data Registry Service 

Relevant Specifications: OpenGIS® Catalog Service Implementation Specification, version 1.1, 
OpenGIS® Web Registry Service IPR (03-024) 
The Data Registry Service extends the Stateless Catalog by providing a base schema and 
management interfaces (create, update, and delete) to support the discovery of data providers. 

2.2.2.4 Service Registry Service 

Relevant Specifications: OpenGIS® Catalog Service Implementation Specification, version 1.1, 
OpenGIS® Web Registry Service IPR (03-024)  
The Services Registry Service extends the Stateless Catalog by providing a base schema and 
management interfaces (create, update, and delete) to support the discovery of Web Services. 

2.2.3 Processing Services 

CIPI processing services operate on geospatial data and provide “value-add” services for 
applications. They can transform, combine, or create data. Processing Services can be tightly or 
loosely coupled with other services such as Data and Portrayal Services. Processing Services can 
be sequenced into a “value-chain” of services to perform specialized processing in support of 
information production workflows and decision support. Examples of OSF processing services 
include:  

2.2.3.1 Gazetteer Services  

Relevant Specifications: OpenGIS® Web Feature Server version 1.0, OpenGIS® Gazetteer 
Service discussion paper 

1. A Gazetteer Service is a network-accessible service that retrieves the known geometries 
for one or more features, given their associated well-known feature identifiers (text strings), 
which are specified at run-time through a query (filter) request.  The identifiers are any words 
or terms that describe the features, which are well known to the Gazetteer Service, such as a 
set of place names and/or landmarks. Each instance of a Gazetteer Service has an associated 



03-063r1 

vocabulary of identifiers. Thus, a Gazetteer Service may apply to a given region, such as a 
country, or some other specialized grouping of features.  The returned geometries are 
expressed in an OGC Spatial Reference System according to the ISO feature model, encoded 
in GML. 

2.2.4 Portrayal Services 

CIPI portrayal services provide visualization of geospatial information. Portrayal Services are 
components that, given one or more inputs, produce rendered outputs (e.g., cartographically 
portrayed maps, perspective views of terrain, annotated images, views of dynamically changing 
features in space and time, etc.). Portrayal Services can be tightly or loosely coupled with other 
services such as Data and Processing Services and transform, combine, or create portrayed 
outputs. Portrayal Services may use styling rules specified during configuration or dynamically 
at runtime by Application Services. Portrayal Services can be sequenced into a “value-chain” of 
services to perform specialized processing in support of information production workflows and 
decision support. Examples of OSF portrayal services include: 

2.2.4.1 Web Map Servers  

Relevant Specifications: OpenGIS® Web Map Server version 1.1 
A Web Map Server (WMS) generates "pictures" of georeferenced data.  Independent of whether 
the underlying data are simple features (such as points, lines and polygons) or coverages (such as 
gridded fields), the WMS produces an image of the data that can be directly viewed in a 
graphical web browser or other picture-viewing software.  A WMS labels its data as one or more 
"Layers," each of which is available in one or more "Styles."  Upon request a WMS makes an 
image of the requested Layer(s), in either the specified or default rendering Style(s).  The image 
request, called GetMap, indicates the Spatial Reference System (SRS) and Bounding Box of the 
portion of the Earth to be mapped, and the output width, height and format of the picture.  
Typical output formats include Portable Network Graphics (PNG), Graphics Interchange Format 
(GIF), Joint Photographic Expert Group format (JPEG), and Tagged Image File Format (TIFF).  
When the data do not cover the entire field of view (such as a network of roads that includes the 
space between the roads), the background can be made transparent in some output formats. 

2.2.4.2 Secure Web Map Servers 

Relevant Specifications: OpenGIS® Web Map Server version 1.1 
This class extends the Web Map Server class by adding Authentication and Identification to the 
interface, and Discretionary Access Controls (DAC) to the data provider logic.  All other Web 
Map Service subclasses can also be subclassed off of the Secure Web Map Server class. 

2.2.4.3 Styled Layer Descriptor Web Map Servers 

Relevant Specifications: OpenGIS® Web Map Server version 1.1,  



03-063r1 

OpenGIS® Style Layer Descriptor discussion paper 
An extension of the basic Web Map Server is the Styled Layer Descriptor (SLD) Web Map 
Server.  The SLD enabled WMS inherits all of the attributes from the Web Map Server then adds 
support for the use of Styled Layer Descriptor documents to specify styling.  Instead of 
generating maps of particular named layers in one or more predefined styles, an SLD Map Server 
extracts features from a data provider and renders them using a stylistic description encoded in 
XML. 

2.2.4.4 Cascading Map Servers 

Relevant Specifications: OpenGIS® Web Map Server version 1.1,  

OpenGIS® Style Layer Descriptor discussion paper 
The Cascading Map Server is a special case of the Web Map Server in that it does not hold any 
data of it’s own, rather it serves as a gateway for other data providers, both OGC and non-OGC 
compliant.  Cascading Map Servers incorporate clients for a number of services.  These clients, 
however, do not have to be just for OpenGIS® interfaces.  Legacy data providers can be 
accessed, their data retrieved, adjusted, and re-presented through the OpenGIS® Web Mapping 
Service interface.  As such, the Cascading Map Server can serve a key role in presenting legacy 
data that may otherwise be inaccessible.  

2.2.4.5 Web Terrain Servers 

Relevant Specifications: OpenGIS® Web Terrain Server discussion paper 
The Web Terrain Server extends the Web Map Server (WMS) interface to allow the portrayal 
three dimensional geospatial data.  This service can be exploited to perform tasks such as terrain 
analysis, mission planning, and fly-throughs.  

2.2.5 Data Services 

OSF data services provide access to collections of data in repositories and databases. Resources 
accessible by Data Services can generally be referenced by a name (identity, address, etc). Given 
a name, Data Services can then find the resource. Data Services usually maintain indexes to help 
speed up the process of finding items by name or by other attributes of the item. The sections 
below describe the current OSF set of Data Services. Examples of OSF data services include: 
2.2.5.1 Web Feature Server 

Relevant Specifications: OpenGIS® Web Feature Server version 1.0 
The Web Feature Service (WFS) supports the query and discovery of geographic features.  In a 
typical Web-base scenario, Web Feature Service (WFS) delivers GML (XML) representations of 
simple geospatial features in response to queries from HTTP clients.  Clients (service requestors) 
access geographic feature data through a WFS by submitting a request for just those features that 
are needed for an application.  The client generates a request posts it to a WFS instance (a WFS 



03-063r1 

server on the Web).  The WFS instance executes the request, returning the results to the client 
(service requester) as GML.  A GML-enabled client can manipulate or operate on the returned 
features.  

2.2.5.2 Secure Web Feature Server 

Relevant Specifications: OpenGIS® Web Feature Server version 1.0 
This class extends the Web Feature Server class by adding Authentication and Identification to 
the interface, and Discretionary Access Controls (DAC) to the data provider logic.  All other 
Web Feature Service subclasses can also be subclassed off of the Secure Web Feature Server 
class. 

2.2.5.3 Web Feature Server – Transactional 

Relevant Specifications: OpenGIS® Web Feature Server version 1.0 
The Transactional Web Feature Server extends the base WFS class with enhancements to allow 
the client to insert, update, and delete data. 

2.2.5.4 Web Annotation Server 

Relevant Specifications: OpenGIS® Web Annotation Server discussion paper 
The Web Annotation Server extends the Web Feature Server (WFS) interface to allow users to 
create annotation features, associate them with vector and/or imagery features, and store them 
back to the server.  Stored annotations can retrieved and evaluated in the context of the original 
features and/or with other information georeferenced to the same area.6.3.5.4 Web Coverage 
Server. 

2.2.5.5 Web Coverage Server 

Relevant Specifications: OpenGIS® Web Coverage Server discussion paper  
The Web Coverage Services (WCS) allows access to geospatial "coverages" containing values or 
properties of geographic locations, rather than static maps (server-rendered as pictures).  In a 
typical Web-based scenario, Web Coverage Services delivers coverage data (e.g., images or 
DTED) in response to queries from HTTP clients.  Access to intact (unrendered) geospatial 
information is needed for client-side rendering, multi-valued coverages, and input into scientific 
models and other clients beyond simple viewers.  The WCS interface supports delivery of 
images, multi-spectral imagery, elevation data (e.g., DTED) and other scientific data. 

2.3 Information Security 

2.3.1 Registration Authority 

Relevant Specifications: see IETF X.509 Public Key Working Group (PKIX)   



03-063r1 

Authentication and Identification within the CICE will be accomplished through Public Key 
cryptology.  Public Key cryptology uses a private key (known only to the user) and a public key 
known to everyone.  Anything encrypted with a private key could only have been encrypted by 
the owner of that private key.  Likewise, anything encrypted with the public key can only be 
decrypted with the private key (i.e. the owner).  Public Key Infrastructures use these 
public/private key pairs to perform Identification and Authentication.  But who assures that the 
owner of a private key is who they claim to be? 

Registration Authorities are responsible for assuring that the owner of a private key is who they 
claim to be.  In most cases the Registration Authority is the body that issues the key pairs.  The 
degree of assurance a private key has depends on how rigorous the Registration Authority is in 
verifying the identity of a key requestor. 
2.3.2 Certificate Authority 

Relevant Specifications: see IETF X.509 Public Key Working Group (PKIX)    
Certificate Authorities (CA) are responsible for providing public keys for individuals and 
assuring the association between that individual and the key.  CAs will usually be set up based 
on an individual’s organization, FEMA for example can be expected to set up a CA. The local 
security policy determines which CAs to trust.  A user certificate coming from an “untrusted” 
CA can be rejected.  

2.3.3 Security Profile Manager 

Relevant Specifications: see IETF X.509 Public Key Working Group (PKIX)    
Due to the large population of potential users of CIPI data, security policies must be based on the 
user’s role and credentials, not on their ID.  Yet the role and credentials data must be available to 
the service in a trusted fashion.  A Security Profile Manager (SPM) is the authoritative source for 
this information.  Each emergency responder will have a “home” SPM where all of the 
information about their clearances, roles and authorizations will reside.  Access to these 
directories will be through an LDAP interface.  This interface will be protected with 
authentication and encryption.  Access to the credentials data for a single individual will require 
a valid certificate for that individual.  These directories will be maintained by the same 
organizations that investigate and assign the credentials to that individual. 

 

2.4 CICE Service Interactions 

The “Cross Border Project” system concept, introduced in Section 6 (CICE Use Case Narratives) 
of the Enterprise Viewpoint, is used here to describe the role of CICE OpenGIS Web Services, 
their interfaces and interactions. In this scenario a commercial chemical truck is suspected to be 
leaking chlorine gas as it approaches a national border crossing in an urban area (e.g., 
Ambassador Bridge between Windsor, Canada and Detroit in the US). The truck may have been 
hijacked.   



03-063r1 

Within this scenario there are a large number of actors potentially involved: Emergency 
Operations Centers (EOC) operating at national, state and local levels, national emergency 
agencies, first responders, authorized responders, municipal police, police dispatchers (PD), 
Hazardous Materials Response Teams (HMRT), Threat Assessment Teams (TAT), Public 
Alerting System Coordinators (PASC), print and broadcast media, etc. 

This scenario is one of situation management and alerting involving multiple governmental 
agencies at multiple levels (international, national, state, local) and private sector. This scenario 
describes a typical set of activities that might occur within an Emergency Operations Center 
(EOC). It is only a narrow glimpse into the full set of activities that occur before, during and 
after such incidents by the full range of actors involved in disaster planning, detection, 
management, communication, response and recovery. 

The situation management and alert notification process that occurs within an EOC is a series of 
steps that form a continual closed loop that may occur, depending on the nature of the incident, 
in the span of minutes, hours or days. The process can be described in five steps depicted in 
Figure 3: 

1) Detect event and establish geographic context,  

2) Notify emergency responders,  

3) Develop situation awareness,  

4) Develop response plan,  

5) Assess risks and package information. 



03-063r1 

Establish Establish 
Geographic Geographic 
Picture for Picture for 
Target AreaTarget Area

Emergency Operations CenterEmergency Operations Center

Notify Notify 
Emergency Emergency 
RespondersResponders

Develop Develop 
Situational Situational 
AwarenessAwareness

Develop Develop 
Response Response 

PlanPlan

Detection, Communication, Tracking, Assessment, ExecutionDetection, Communication, Tracking, Assessment, Execution

Assess Risks Assess Risks 
and Package and Package 
InformationInformation

Facilities
Info

Cultural and
Physical
Features

Population
Data

Intelligence
Information

Environmental
Conditions

Transportation
Information

Internet

 

Figure 3. An Emergency Response Process 

 

Datasets required for effective conduct of the emergency response process include:  

• Orthoimagery, 

• Transportation, 

• Borders (national, state/provincial, local) 

• Cadastral (Parcel Boundaries and Building Footprints) 

• Natural Features (Terrain, Hydrography, etc) 

• Critical Infrastructure (aquifers, water distribution, water treatment, bridges, tunnels, gas 
mains, geodetic control, telecommunications, power generation and transmission, public 
assembly, hospitals, hazardous materials storage, etc) 

• Demographics (population distribution and density, economic activities, etc) 

• Weather (local/national, current/forecast) 

 



03-063r1 

The following series of sequence diagrams are used to elaborate the role of various types of 
OpenGIS Web Services and the nature of the interactions between client applications, such as an 
EOC Client, and services comprising the CICE as required for the cross-border situation 
management and alert notification scenario. 

Activity #1: Establish Geographic Context 

The objective of this activity is to develop a base map showing the location of the incident and 
its surrounding vicinity including roadway, waterway and border-crossing data. This information 
is to be used by Hazardous Materials Response Team (HMRT) and Police Dispatchers (PD). 

 

Figure 4. Set Geographic Context 

Steps 1-2. The EOC Client first accesses instances of OWS WMS (such as the USGS Node), to 
gather basemap data including orthoimagery, transportation and basic cultural features for the 
area of interest.  

Steps 3-4. For more detailed and current information, the EOC Client queries the service 
registries (WRS), maintained and operated by USGS and Geoconnections portals, for services 
that offer appropriate transportation and waterway information.  

Step 5-8. Having found services with the appropriate data for the current situation, the EOC 
Client proceeds to access and present those data to the user in the form of a map. 

Step 9. EOC Client creates a “Situation Object Model” (SOM) document for the present situation 
and inserts it as an entry in the SOM Manager. The information gathered in this activity is now 
available to all user(s) with the appropriate access privileges. 



03-063r1 

Activity #2: Communicate  

The objective of this activity is to identify and map the major roadways, including border 
crossings, leading toward and away from the incident location. The EOC Client must first upload 
the initial situation picture (developed in Activity #1) and then communicate alert messages to 
the appropriate responders. 

 

Figure 5. Alert Notification 

Steps 1-4. EOC Client accesses the SOM document and subsequently various web services to 
access and display basemap data (developed in Activity #1), incident location, routes and traffic 
information that together represent the current “situation picture”. 

Step 5. The user of the EOC Client or through interaction with other EOC actors and services, 
determines the incident zone (i.e., the area-of-interest and region of operations for the incident).  

Step 6,8,9. The EOC Client asynchronously notifies the Alert Notification System responsible 
for packaging and communicating alert notifications to appropriate authorized response 
personnel (Fire and Rescue, HMRT, Police, etc). 

Step 7. EOC Client updates the SOM document entry in the SOM Manager with the latest 
information associated with the incident. The information gathered in this activity is now 
available to all user(s) with the appropriate access privileges. 

 



03-063r1 

Activity #3: Track and Report Situation  

The objective of these activities is to track and map the location of incident subjects (e.g., 
vehicles) as reported in real-time based on the closest mile marker or intersection location. 

 

 

Figure 6. Track and Report Situation 

Step 1. EOC Client accesses the SOM document and subsequently various web services to 
access and display basemap data and the current “situation picture” (developed in Activities #1-
2). 

Step 2. EOC Client accesses the Services WRS to find and subsequently access services having 
appropriate information, including: high-resolution imagery showing major roads leading to and 
away from the bridge and tunnel at the border crossing, traffic cameras, large scale road datasets, 
and the current observed/detected position of the vehicle of interest. 

Steps 3-7. EOC Client accesses services discovered in Step 2 to obtain current/relevant imagery, 
traffic situation camera images, detailed road network data (for both sides of border), and 
incident location and related features. EOC Client displays this situation information in one or 
more views (maps, reports, etc). 



03-063r1 

Step 8. EOC Client updates the SOM document entry in the SOM Manager with the latest 
information associated with the incident. The information gathered in this activity is now 
available to all user(s) with the appropriate access privileges. 

Activity #4: Plan Evacuation  

The objective of this activity is to track and map the final location of the vehicle as reported in 
real-time and generate evacuation routes for the population within the affected area of the 
incident. 

 

Figure 7. Evacuation Planning 

Step 1. EOC Client accesses the SOM document and subsequently various web services to 
access and display basemap data and the current “situation picture” (developed in Activities #1-
3). 

Step 2-3. EOC Client accesses large scale road datasets, from appropriate authorities, for 
jurisdictions on both side of the national border. 

Steps 4-5. EOC Client, by automated or semi-automated means, identifies emergency evacuation 
routes using data acquired in Steps 2-3 and in earlier Activities #1-3. EOC Clients display these 
evacuation routes as a layer overlaid on the base map. 



03-063r1 

Step 6. EOC Client inserts the generated emergency evacuation routes to the SOM document and 
updates the SOM document entry in the SOM Manager. The information gathered in this activity 
is now available to all user(s) with the appropriate access privileges. 

 

Activity #5: Risk Assessment and Information Packaging 
The objective of this activity is to: 1) map structures and population, 2) display HAZMAT plume 
data illustrating the (potential) impact of the chemical release to the structures and population 
within the vicinity of the incident, 3) link the situation to specific actions (e.g., public alert, 
evacuation, recovery operations, etc) to the threat source and 4) package for distribution. 

 

 

Figure 8. Risk Assessment 

Step 1. EOC Client accesses the SOM document and subsequently various web services to 
access and display basemap data and the current “situation picture” (developed in Activities #1-
3). 

Steps 2-6. Assess risk by accessing and visualizing: a) weather data, b) population information 
(e.g., parcels, buildings and population densities) and c) plume data calculated from a point-
source chemical dispersion model.  



03-063r1 

Step 7. Package this information in the form of an Evacuation Zone map suitable for public 
release through the print and broadcast media. 

Step 8. EOC Client inserts the collected information into the SOM document and updates the 
SOM document entry in the SOM Manager. The information gathered in this activity is now 
available to all user(s) with the appropriate access privileges. 

 
 



03-063r1 

Bibliography 

[1] IETF/RFC 2119. Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels. March 1997. 
Available [online]: <http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt>. 

 

 

 


