
GML-3.1.1/base/basicTypes.xsd
 
   
     basicTypes.xsd
     
    Generic simpleContent components for use in GML 
    Copyright (c) 2005 OGC, All Rights Reserved.
	For conditions, see OGC Software Notice http://www.opengeospatial.org/about/?page=ipr
    
  
  
   
     
        Some common reasons for a null value:   
			
        innapplicable - the object does not have a value
        missing - The correct value is not readily available to the sender of this data.  
                           Furthermore, a correct value may not exist.
        template - the value will be available later
        unknown - The correct value is not known to, and not computable by, the sender of this data. 
                           However, a correct value probably exists.
        withheld - the value is not divulged 
        
        other:reason - as indicated by "reason" string
        
        Specific communities may agree to assign more strict semantics when these terms are used in a particular context.  
      
    
     
       
         
           
           
           
           
           
        
      
       
         
           
        
      
    
  
  
   
     
       Utility type for null elements.  The value may be selected from one of the enumerated tokens, or may be a URI in which case this should identify a resource which describes the reason for the null. 
    
     
  
  
   
  
   
     
       Utility type used in various places 
      - e.g. to indicate the direction of topological objects;
      "+" for forwards, or "-" for backwards.
    
     
       
       
    
  
  
   
     
       Union of the XML Schema boolean type and the GML Nulltype.  An element which uses this type may have content which is either a boolean {0,1,true,false} or a value from Nulltype
    
     
  
  
   
     
       XML List based on the union type defined above.  An element declared with this type contains a space-separated list of boolean values {0,1,true,false} with null values interspersed as needed
    
     
  
  
   
     
       XML List based on XML Schema boolean type.  An element of this type contains a space-separated list of boolean values {0,1,true,false}
    
     
  
  
   
     
       Union of the XML Schema string type and the GML Nulltype.  An element which uses this type may have content which is either a string or a value from Nulltype.  Note that a "string" may contain whitespace.  
    
     
  
  
   
     
       Union of the XML Schema Name type and the GML Nulltype.  An element which uses this type may have content which is either a Name or a value from Nulltype.  Note that a "Name" may not contain whitespace.  
    
     
  
  
   
     
       XML List based on the union type defined above.  An element declared with this type contains a space-separated list of Name values with null values interspersed as needed
    
     
  
  
   
     
       XML List based on XML Schema Name type.  An element of this type contains a space-separated list of Name values
    
     
  
  
   
     
       Union of the XML Schema double type and the GML Nulltype.  An element which uses this type may have content which is either a double or a value from Nulltype
    
     
  
  
   
     
       XML List based on the union type defined above.  An element declared with this type contains a space-separated list of double values with null values interspersed as needed
    
     
  
  
   
     
       XML List based on XML Schema double type.  An element of this type contains a space-separated list of double values
    
     
  
  
   
     
       Union of the XML Schema integer type and the GML Nulltype.  An element which uses this type may have content which is either an integer or a value from Nulltype
    
     
  
  
   
     
       XML List based on the union type defined above.  An element declared with this type contains a space-separated list of integer values with null values interspersed as needed
    
     
  
  
   
     
       XML List based on XML Schema integer type.  An element of this type contains a space-separated list of integer values
    
     
  
  
   
     
       Name or code with an (optional) authority.  Text token.  
      If the codeSpace attribute is present, then its value should identify a dictionary, thesaurus 
      or authority for the term, such as the organisation who assigned the value, 
      or the dictionary from which it is taken.  
      A text string with an optional codeSpace attribute. 
    
     
       
         
      
    
  
  
   
     
       List of values on a uniform nominal scale.  List of text tokens.   
      In a list context a token should not include any spaces, so xsd:Name is used instead of xsd:string.   
      If a codeSpace attribute is present, then its value is a reference to 
      a Reference System for the value, a dictionary or code list.
    
     
       
         
      
    
  
  
   
     
       List of values on a uniform nominal scale.  List of text tokens.   
      In a list context a token should not include any spaces, so xsd:Name is used instead of xsd:string.  
      A member of the list may be a typed null.  
      If a codeSpace attribute is present, then its value is a reference to 
      a Reference System for the value, a dictionary or code list.
    
     
       
         
      
    
  
  
   
     
       Number with a scale.  
      The value of uom (Units Of Measure) attribute is a reference to a Reference System for the amount, either a ratio or position scale. 
    
     
       
         
      
    
  
  
   
     
       List of numbers with a uniform scale.  
      The value of uom (Units Of Measure) attribute is a reference to 
      a Reference System for the amount, either a ratio or position scale. 
    
     
       
         
      
    
  
  
   
     
       List of numbers with a uniform scale.  
      A member of the list may be a typed null. 
      The value of uom (Units Of Measure) attribute is a reference to 
      a Reference System for the amount, either a ratio or position scale. 
    
     
       
         
      
    
  
  
   
     
       Tables or arrays of tuples.  
        May be used for text-encoding of values from a table.  
        Actually just a string, but allows the user to indicate which characters are used as separators.  
        The value of the 'cs' attribute is the separator for coordinate values, 
        and the value of the 'ts' attribute gives the tuple separator (a single space by default); 
        the default values may be changed to reflect local usage.
        Defaults to CSV within a tuple, space between tuples.  
        However, any string content will be schema-valid.  
    
     
       
         
         
         
      
    
  
  
   
     
       A set of values, representing a list of token with the lexical value space of NCName. The tokens are seperated by whitespace.
    
     
  
  
   
     
       A set of values, representing a list of token with the lexical value space of QName. The tokens are seperated by whitespace.
    
     
  
  




GML-3.1.1/base/ReadMe.txt
This set of XML Schema Documents for GML Version 3.1.1 has been edited
to reflect the corrigendum to documents 0GC 03-105r1 and OGC 04-092r4 
that is based on the change requests: 
OGC 05-068r1 "Store xlinks.xsd file at a fixed location"
OGC 05-081r2 "Change to use relative paths"
OGC 05-105 "Remove description and copyright tags from XML schema documents"

Arliss Whiteside, 2005-11-22





GML-3.1.1/base/coordinateReferenceSystems.xsd
 
	 
		 
		 How to encode coordinate reference system definitions. Builds on referenceSystems.xsd to encode the data needed to define coordinate reference systems, including the specific subtypes of coordinate reference systems. 
		Copyright (c) 2002-2005 OGC, All Rights Reserved. For conditions, see OGC Software Notice http://www.opengeospatial.org/about/?page=ipr
		This schema encodes the Coordinate Reference System (SC_) package of the extended UML Model for OGC Abstract Specification Topic 2: Spatial Referencing by Coordinates, with the exception of the abstract "SC_CRS" class. The "SC_CRS" class is encoded in referenceSystems.xsd, to eliminate the (circular) references from coordinateOperations.xsd to coordinateReferenceSystems.xsd. That UML model is adapted from ISO 19111 - Spatial referencing by coordinates, as described in Annex C of Topic 2. 
		Caution: The CRS package in GML 3.1 and GML 3.1.1 is preliminary, and is expected to undergo some modifications that are not backward compatible during the development of GML 3.2 (ISO 19136). The GML 3.2 package will implement the model described in the revised version of ISO 19111. 
	
	
	 
	 
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A coordinate reference system consists of an ordered sequence of coordinate system axes that are related to the earth through a datum. A coordinate reference system is defined by one datum and by one coordinate system. Most coordinate reference system do not move relative to the earth, except for engineering coordinate reference systems defined on moving platforms such as cars, ships, aircraft, and spacecraft. For further information, see OGC Abstract Specification Topic 2.

Coordinate reference systems are commonly divided into sub-types. The common classification criterion for sub-typing of coordinate reference systems is the way in which they deal with earth curvature. This has a direct effect on the portion of the earth's surface that can be covered by that type of CRS with an acceptable degree of error. The exception to the rule is the subtype "Temporal" which has been added by analogy. 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Association to a coordinate reference system, either referencing or containing the definition of that reference system. 
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A coordinate reference system describing the position of points through two or more independent coordinate reference systems. 
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 Ordered sequence of associations to all the component coordinate reference systems included in this compound coordinate reference system. 
						
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 An association to a component coordinate reference system included in this compound coordinate reference system. 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Association to a compound coordinate reference system, either referencing or containing the definition of that reference system. 
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A coordinate reference system based on an ellipsoidal approximation of the geoid; this provides an accurate representation of the geometry of geographic features for a large portion of the earth's surface.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Association to the ellipsoidal coordinate system used by this CRS. 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Association to the geodetic datum used by this CRS. 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Association to a geographic coordinate reference system, either referencing or containing the definition of that reference system. 
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A 1D coordinate reference system used for recording heights or depths. Vertical CRSs make use of the direction of gravity to define the concept of height or depth, but the relationship with gravity may not be straightforward. By implication, ellipsoidal heights (h) cannot be captured in a vertical coordinate reference system. Ellipsoidal heights cannot exist independently, but only as an inseparable part of a 3D coordinate tuple defined in a geographic 3D coordinate reference system. 
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Association to the vertical coordinate system used by this CRS. 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Association to the vertical datum used by this CRS. 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Association to a vertical coordinate reference system, either referencing or containing the definition of that reference system. 
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A 3D coordinate reference system with the origin at the approximate centre of mass of the earth. A geocentric CRS deals with the earth's curvature by taking a 3D spatial view, which obviates the need to model the earth's curvature. 
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
						 
					
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Association to the Cartesian coordinate system used by this CRS. 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Association to the spherical coordinate system used by this CRS.
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Association to a geocentric coordinate reference system, either referencing or containing the definition of that reference system. 
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A coordinate reference system that is defined by its coordinate conversion from another coordinate reference system (not by a datum). This abstract complexType shall not be used, extended, or restricted, in an Application Schema, to define a concrete subtype with a meaning equivalent to a concrete subtype specified in this document. 
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Association to the coordinate reference system used by this derived CRS. 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Association to the coordinate conversion used to define this derived CRS. 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A 2D coordinate reference system used to approximate the shape of the earth on a planar surface, but in such a way that the distortion that is inherent to the approximation is carefully controlled and known. Distortion correction is commonly applied to calculated bearings and distances to produce values that are a close match to actual field values. 
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Association to a projected coordinate reference system, either referencing or containing the definition of that reference system. 
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A coordinate reference system that is defined by its coordinate conversion from another coordinate reference system but is not a projected coordinate reference system. This category includes coordinate reference systems derived from a projected coordinate reference system. 
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Type of a derived coordinate reference system. 
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 Reference to a source of information specifying the values and meanings of all the allowed string values for this DerivedCRSTypeType. 
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Association to the coordinate system used by this CRS. 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Association to a non-projected derived coordinate reference system, either referencing or containing the definition of that reference system. 
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A contextually local coordinate reference system; which can be divided into two broad categories:
- earth-fixed systems applied to engineering activities on or near the surface of the earth;
- CRSs on moving platforms such as road vehicles, vessels, aircraft, or spacecraft.
For further information, see OGC Abstract Specification Topic 2. 
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Association to the engineering datum used by this CRS. 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Association to an engineering coordinate reference system, either referencing or containing the definition of that reference system. 
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 An engineering coordinate reference system applied to locations in images. Image coordinate reference systems are treated as a separate sub-type because a separate user community exists for images with its own terms of reference. 
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
						 
					
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Association to the oblique Cartesian coordinate system used by this CRS.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Association to the image datum used by this CRS. 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Association to an image coordinate reference system, either referencing or containing the definition of that reference system. 
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A 1D coordinate reference system used for the recording of time. 
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Association to the temporal coordinate system used by this CRS. 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Association to the temporal datum used by this CRS. 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Association to a temporal coordinate reference system, either referencing or containing the definition of that reference system. 
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	




GML-3.1.1/base/coordinateOperations.xsd
 
	 
		 
		 How to encode coordinate operation definitions. Builds on referenceSystems.xsd to encode the data needed to define coordinate operations, including Transformations, Conversions, and other specific subtypes of operations. 
		Copyright (c) 2002-2005 OGC, All Rights Reserved. For conditions, see OGC Software Notice http://www.opengeospatial.org/about/?page=ipr
		This schema encodes the Coordinate Operation (CC_) package of the extended UML Model for OGC Abstract Specification Topic 2: Spatial Referencing by Coordinates. That UML model is adapted from ISO 19111 - Spatial referencing by coordinates, as described in Annex C of Topic 2. 
		Caution: The CRS package in GML 3.1 and GML 3.1.1 is preliminary, and is expected to undergo some modifications that are not backward compatible during the development of GML 3.2 (ISO 19136). The GML 3.2 package will implement the model described in the revised version of ISO 19111. 
	
	
	 
	 
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Basic encoding for coordinate operation objects, simplifying and restricting the DefinitionType as needed. 
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
				
				 
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 The name by which this coordinate operation is identified. 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 A mathematical operation on coordinates that transforms or converts coordinates to another coordinate reference system. Many but not all coordinate operations (from CRS A to CRS B) also uniquely define the inverse operation (from CRS B to CRS A). In some cases, the operation method algorithm for the inverse operation is the same as for the forward algorithm, but the signs of some operation parameter values must be reversed. In other cases, different algorithms are required for the forward and inverse operations, but the same operation parameter values are used. If (some) entirely different parameter values are needed, a different coordinate operation shall be defined.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 Set of alternative identifications of this coordinate operation. The first coordinateOperationID, if any, is normally the primary identification code, and any others are aliases. 
						
					
					 
						 
							 Comments on or information about this coordinate operation, including source information. 
						
					
					 
					 
					 
					 
						 
							 Unordered set of estimates of the impact of this coordinate operation on point position accuracy. Gives position error estimates for target coordinates of this coordinate operation, assuming no errors in source coordinates. 
						
					
					 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 An identification of a coordinate operation. 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Version of the coordinate transformation (i.e., instantiation due to the stochastic nature of the parameters). Mandatory when describing a transformation, and should not be supplied for a conversion. 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Association to the source CRS (coordinate reference system) of this coordinate operation. 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Association to the target CRS (coordinate reference system) of this coordinate operation. For constraints on multiplicity of "sourceCRS" and "targetCRS", see UML model of Coordinate Operation package in OGC Abstract Specification topic 2. 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Association to a coordinate operation, either referencing or containing the definition of that coordinate operation. 
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 An ordered sequence of two or more single coordinate operations. The sequence of operations is constrained by the requirement that the source coordinate reference system of step (n+1) must be the same as the target coordinate reference system of step (n). The source coordinate reference system of the first step and the target coordinate reference system of the last step are the source and target coordinate reference system associated with the concatenated operation. Instead of a forward operation, an inverse operation may be used for one or more of the operation steps mentioned above, if the inverse operation is uniquely defined by the forward operation.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 Ordered sequence of associations to the two or more single operations used by this concatenated operation. 
						
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Association to a single operation. 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Association to a concatenated operation, either referencing or containing the definition of that concatenated operation. 
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	 
		 
			 A single (not concatenated) coordinate operation. 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Association to a single operation, either referencing or containing the definition of that single operation. 
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A pass-through operation specifies that a subset of a coordinate tuple is subject to a specific coordinate operation. 
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 Ordered sequence of positive integers defining the positions in a coordinate tuple of the coordinates affected by this pass-through operation. 
						
					
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 A positive integer defining a position in a coordinate tuple. 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Association to the operation applied to the specified ordinates. 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Association to a pass through operation, either referencing or containing the definition of that pass through operation. 
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	 
		 
			 A parameterized mathematical operation on coordinates that transforms or converts coordinates to another coordinate reference system. This coordinate operation uses an operation method, usually with associated parameter values. However, operation methods and parameter values are directly associated with concrete subtypes, not with this abstract type.

This abstract complexType shall not be directly used, extended, or restricted in a compliant Application Schema. 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Association to an abstract operation, either referencing or containing the definition of that operation. 
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 An abstract operation on coordinates that does not include any change of datum. The best-known example of a coordinate conversion is a map projection. The parameters describing coordinate conversions are defined rather than empirically derived. Note that some conversions have no parameters.

This abstract complexType is expected to be extended for well-known operation methods with many Conversion instances, in Application Schemas that define operation-method-specialized element names and contents. This conversion uses an operation method, usually with associated parameter values. However, operation methods and parameter values are directly associated with concrete subtypes, not with this abstract type. All concrete types derived from this type shall extend this type to include a "usesMethod" element that references the "OperationMethod" element. Similarly, all concrete types derived from this type shall extend this type to include zero or more elements each named "uses...Value" that each use the type of an element substitutable for the "_generalParameterValue" element. 
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
					 
					 
					 
					 
					 
				
				 
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Association to a general conversion, either referencing or containing the definition of that conversion. 
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A concrete operation on coordinates that does not include any change of Datum. The best-known example of a coordinate conversion is a map projection. The parameters describing coordinate conversions are defined rather than empirically derived. Note that some conversions have no parameters.

This concrete complexType can be used with all operation methods, without using an Application Schema that defines operation-method-specialized element names and contents, especially for methods with only one Conversion instance. 
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
						 
							 Unordered list of composition associations to the set of parameter values used by this conversion operation. 
						
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Association to the operation method used by this coordinate operation. 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Composition association to a parameter value used by this coordinate operation. 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Association to a concrete general-purpose conversion, either referencing or containing the definition of that conversion. 
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 An abstract operation on coordinates that usually includes a change of Datum. The parameters of a coordinate transformation are empirically derived from data containing the coordinates of a series of points in both coordinate reference systems. This computational process is usually "over-determined", allowing derivation of error (or accuracy) estimates for the transformation. Also, the stochastic nature of the parameters may result in multiple (different) versions of the same coordinate transformation.

This abstract complexType is expected to be extended for well-known operation methods with many Transformation instances, in Application Schemas that define operation-method-specialized value element names and contents. This transformation uses an operation method with associated parameter values. However, operation methods and parameter values are directly associated with concrete subtypes, not with this abstract type. All concrete types derived from this type shall extend this type to include a "usesMethod" element that references one "OperationMethod" element. Similarly, all concrete types derived from this type shall extend this type to include one or more elements each named "uses...Value" that each use the type of an element substitutable for the "_generalParameterValue" element. 
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
					 
					 
					 
					 
					 
					 
					 
					 
				
				 
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Association to a general transformation, either referencing or containing the definition of that transformation. 
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A concrete operation on coordinates that usually includes a change of datum. The parameters of a coordinate transformation are empirically derived from data containing the coordinates of a series of points in both coordinate reference systems. This computational process is usually "over-determined", allowing derivation of error (or accuracy) estimates for the transformation. Also, the stochastic nature of the parameters may result in multiple (different) versions of the same coordinate transformation.

This concrete complexType can be used for all operation methods, without using an Application Schema that defines operation-method-specialized element names and contents, especially for methods with only one Transformation instance. 
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
						 
							 Unordered set of composition associations to the set of parameter values used by this transformation operation. 
						
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Association to a transformation, either referencing or containing the definition of that transformation. 
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Abstract parameter value or group of parameter values.
			
This abstract complexType is expected to be extended and restricted for well-known operation methods with many instances, in Application Schemas that define operation-method-specialized element names and contents. Specific parameter value elements are directly contained in concrete subtypes, not in this abstract type. All concrete types derived from this type shall extend this type to include one "...Value" element with an appropriate type, which should be one of the element types allowed in the ParameterValueType. In addition, all derived concrete types shall extend this type to include a "valueOfParameter" element that references one element substitutable for the "OperationParameter" element. 
		
		 
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A parameter value, ordered sequence of values, or reference to a file of parameter values. This concrete complexType can be used for operation methods without using an Application Schema that defines operation-method-specialized element names and contents, especially for methods with only one instance. This complexType can be used, extended, or restricted for well-known operation methods, especially for methods with many instances. 
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
						 
						 
						 
						 
						 
						 
						 
					
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Numeric value of an operation parameter, with its associated unit of measure. 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Value of an angle operation parameter, in either degree-minute-second format or single value format. 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 String value of an operation parameter. A string value does not have an associated unit of measure. 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Positive integer value of an operation parameter, usually used for a count. An integer value does not have an associated unit of measure. 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Boolean value of an operation parameter. A Boolean value does not have an associated unit of measure. 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Ordered sequence of two or more numeric values of an operation parameter list, where each value has the same associated unit of measure. An element of this type contains a space-separated sequence of double values. 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Ordered sequence of two or more integer values of an operation parameter list, usually used for counts. These integer values do not have an associated unit of measure. An element of this type contains a space-separated sequence of integer values. 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Reference to a file or a part of a file containing one or more parameter values, each numeric value with its associated unit of measure. When referencing a part of a file, that file must contain multiple identified parts, such as an XML encoded document. Furthermore, the referenced file or part of a file can reference another part of the same or different files, as allowed in XML documents. 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Association to the operation parameter that this is a value of. 
		
	
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A group of related parameter values. The same group can be repeated more than once in a Conversion, Transformation, or higher level parameterValueGroup, if those instances contain different values of one or more parameterValues which suitably distinquish among those groups. This concrete complexType can be used for operation methods without using an Application Schema that defines operation-method-specialized element names and contents, especially for methods with only one instance. This complexType can be used, extended, or restricted for well-known operation methods, especially for methods with many instances. 
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 Unordered set of composition associations to the parameter values and groups of values included in this group. 
						
					
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 A composition association to a parameter value or group of values included in this group. 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Association to the operation parameter group for which this element provides parameter values. 
		
	
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Basic encoding for operation method objects, simplifying and restricting the DefinitionType as needed. 
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
				
				 
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 The name by which this operation method is identified. 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Definition of an algorithm used to perform a coordinate operation. Most operation methods use a number of operation parameters, although some coordinate conversions use none. Each coordinate operation using the method assigns values to these parameters. 
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 Set of alternative identifications of this operation method. The first methodID, if any, is normally the primary identification code, and any others are aliases. 
						
					
					 
						 
							 Comments on or information about this operation method, including source information.
						
					
					 
					 
					 
					 
						 
							 Unordered list of associations to the set of operation parameters and parameter groups used by this operation method. 
						
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 An identification of an operation method. 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Formula(s) used by this operation method. The value may be a reference to a publication. Note that the operation method may not be analytic, in which case this element references or contains the procedure, not an analytic formula.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Number of dimensions in the source CRS of this operation method. 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Number of dimensions in the target CRS of this operation method. 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Association to an operation parameter or parameter group used by this operation method. 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Association to a concrete general-purpose operation method, either referencing or containing the definition of that method. 
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Abstract definition of a parameter or group of parameters used by an operation method. 
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 The minimum number of times that values for this parameter group or parameter are required. If this attribute is omitted, the minimum number is one. 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Association to an operation parameter or group, either referencing or containing the definition of that parameter or group. 
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Basic encoding for operation parameter objects, simplifying and restricting the DefinitionType as needed. 
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
					 
				
				 
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 The name by which this operation parameter is identified. 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 The definition of a parameter used by an operation method. Most parameter values are numeric, but other types of parameter values are possible. This complexType is expected to be used or extended for all operation methods, without defining operation-method-specialized element names.  
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 Set of alternative identifications of this operation parameter. The first parameterID, if any, is normally the primary identification code, and any others are aliases. 
						
					
					 
						 
							 Comments on or information about this operation parameter, including source information. 
						
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 An identification of an operation parameter. 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Association to an operation parameter, either referencing or containing the definition of that parameter. 
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Basic encoding for operation parameter group objects, simplifying and restricting the DefinitionType as needed. 
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
					 
				
				 
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 The name by which this operation parameter group is identified. 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 The definition of a group of parameters used by an operation method. This complexType is expected to be used or extended for all applicable operation methods, without defining operation-method-specialized element names.  
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 Set of alternative identifications of this operation parameter group. The first groupID, if any, is normally the primary identification code, and any others are aliases. 
						
					
					 
						 
							 Comments on or information about this operation parameter group, including source information. 
						
					
					 
					 
						 
							 Unordered list of associations to the set of operation parameters that are members of this group. 
						
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 An identification of an operation parameter group. 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 The maximum number of times that values for this parameter group can be included. If this attribute is omitted, the maximum number is one. 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Association to an operation parameter that is a member of a group. 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Association to an operation parameter, either referencing or containing the definition of that parameter. 
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	




GML-3.1.1/base/gmlBase.xsd
 
	 
		 
			 Schematron validation
			 
			 
			 
				 
					 Property element may not carry both a reference to an object and contain an object.
					 Property element must either carry a reference to an object or contain an object.
				
			
		
		 GML base schema for GML 3
		Components to support the GML encoding model.  
		The abstract Schematron rules can be used by any schema that includes gmlBase.  
		Copyright (c) 2001-2005 OGC, All Rights Reserved. For conditions, see OGC Software Notice http://www.opengeospatial.org/about/?page=ipr
	
	
	 
	 
	
	
	
	
	
	 
		 
			 This abstract element is the head of a substitutionGroup hierararchy which may contain either simpleContent or complexContent elements.  It is used to assert the model position of "class" elements declared in other GML schemas.
		
	
	
	
	 
		 
			 Global element which acts as the head of a substitution group that may include any element which is a GML feature, object, geometry or complex value
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 This content model group makes it easier to construct types that 
      derive from AbstractGMLType and its descendents "by restriction".  
      A reference to the group saves having to enumerate the standard object properties.
		
		 
			 
			 
			 
				 
					 Multiple names may be provided.  These will often be distinguished by being assigned by different authorities, as indicated by the value of the codeSpace attribute.  In an instance document there will usually only be one name per authority.
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 All complexContent GML elements are directly or indirectly derived from this abstract supertype 
	to establish a hierarchy of GML types that may be distinguished from other XML types by their ancestry. 
	Elements in this hierarchy may have an ID and are thus referenceable.
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	
	 
		 
			 Generic GML element to contain a heterogeneous collection of GML _Objects
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 A non-abstract generic collection type that can be used as a document element for a collection of any GML types - Geometries, Topologies, Features ...

FeatureCollections may only contain Features.  GeometryCollections may only contain Geometrys.  Bags are less constrained  they must contain objects that are substitutable for gml:_Object.  This may mix several levels, including Features, Definitions, Dictionaries, Geometries etc.  

The content model would ideally be 
   member 0..*
   members 0..1
   member 0..*
for maximum flexibility in building a collection from both homogeneous and distinct components: 
included "member" elements each contain a single Object
an included "members" element contains a set of Objects 

However, this is non-deterministic, thus prohibited by XSD.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	
	 
		 
			 Generic GML element to contain a homogeneous array of GML _Objects
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 A non-abstract generic collection type that can be used as a document element for a homogeneous collection of any GML types - Geometries, Topologies, Features ...
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	
	 
		 
			 Abstract element which acts as the head of a substitution group for packages of MetaData properties.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 An abstract base type for complex metadata types.
		
		 
	
	
	
	 
		 
			 Concrete element in the _MetaData substitution group, which permits any well-formed XML content.  Intended to act as a container for metadata defined in external schemas, for which it is not possible to add the concrete components to the GML _MetaData substitution group directly. Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	
	
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
					
				
			
			 must carry a reference to an object or contain an object but not both
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A pattern or base for derived types used to specify complex types corresponding to an  unspecified UML association - either composition or aggregation.  Restricts the cardinality of Objects contained in the association to a maximum of one.  An instance of this type can contain an element representing an Object, or serve as a pointer to a remote Object.  

Descendents of this type can be restricted in an application schema to 
* allow only specified classes as valid participants in the aggregation
* allow only association by reference (i.e. empty the content model) or by value (i.e. remove the xlinks).    

When used for association by reference, the value of the gml:remoteSchema attribute can be used to locate a schema fragment that constrains the target instance.   

In many cases it is desirable to impose the constraint prohibiting the occurence of both reference and value in the same instance, as that would be ambiguous.  This is accomplished by adding a directive in the annotation element of the element declaration.  This directive can be in the form of normative prose, or can use a Schematron pattern to automatically constrain co-occurrence - see the declaration for _strictAssociation below.   

If co-occurence is not prohibited, then both a link and content may be present.  If this occurs in an instance, then the rule for interpretation is that the instance found by traversing the href provides the normative value of the property, and should be used when possible.  The value(s) included as content may be used if the remote instance cannot be resolved.  This may be considered to be a "cached" version of the value(s).
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A pattern or base for derived types used to specify complex types corresponding to a UML aggregation association.  An instance of this type serves as a pointer to a remote Object.
		
		 
		 
	
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A base for derived types used to specify complex types containing an array of objects, by unspecified UML association - either composition or aggregation.  An instance of this type contains elements representing Objects.

Ideally this type would be derived by extension of AssociationType.  
However, this leads to a non-deterministic content model, since both the base and the extension have minOccurs="0", and is thus prohibited in XML Schema.
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	
	 
		 
			 Contains or refers to a metadata package that contains metadata properties.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Base type for complex metadata property types.
		
		 
			 
			
		
		 
		 
	
	
	
	 
		 
			 Database handle for the object.  It is of XML type ID, so is constrained to be unique in the XML document within which it occurs.  An external identifier for the object in the form of a URI may be constructed using standard XML and XPointer methods.  This is done by concatenating the URI for the document, a fragment separator, and the value of the id attribute.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Reference to an XML Schema fragment that specifies the content model of the propertys value. This is in conformance with the XML Schema Section 4.14 Referencing Schemas from Elsewhere.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Attribute group used to enable property elements to refer to their value remotely. It contains the simple link components from xlinks.xsd, with all members optional, and the remoteSchema attribute, which is also optional.  These attributes can be attached to any element, thus allowing it to act as a pointer. The 'remoteSchema' attribute allows an element  that carries link attributes to indicate that the element is declared  in a remote schema rather than by the schema that constrains the current document instance.
		
		 
		 
	
	
	 
		 
			 Label for the object, normally a descriptive name. An object may have several names, typically assigned by different authorities.  The authority for a name is indicated by the value of its (optional) codeSpace attribute.  The name may or may not be unique, as determined by the rules of the organization responsible for the codeSpace.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Contains a simple text description of the object, or refers to an external description.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 This type is available wherever there is a need for a "text" type property. It is of string type, so the text can be included inline, but the value can also be referenced remotely via xlinks from the AssociationAttributeGroup. If the remote reference is present, then the value obtained by traversing the link should be used, and the string content of the element can be used for an annotation.
		
		 
			 
				 
			
		
	
	




GML-3.1.1/base/gml.xsd
 
	 
		 gml.xsd
		 Top level GML schema
    Copyright (c) 2002-2005 OGC, All Rights Reserved.
	For conditions, see OGC Software Notice http://www.opengeospatial.org/about/?page=ipr
	
	
	 
	 
	 
	 
	 
	 
	 
	




GML-3.1.1/base/coordinateSystems.xsd
 
	 
		 
		 How to encode coordinate system definitions. Builds on referenceSystems.xsd to encode the data needed to define coordinate systems, including the specific subtypes of coordinate systems. 
		Copyright (c) 2002-2005 OGC, All Rights Reserved. For conditions, see OGC Software Notice http://www.opengeospatial.org/about/?page=ipr
		This schema encodes the Coordinate System (CS_) package of the extended UML Model for OGC Abstract Specification Topic 2: Spatial Referencing by Coordinates. That UML model is adapted from ISO 19111 - Spatial referencing by coordinates, as described in Annex C of Topic 2. 
		Caution: The CRS package in GML 3.1 and GML 3.1.1 is preliminary, and is expected to undergo some modifications that are not backward compatible during the development of GML 3.2 (ISO 19136). The GML 3.2 package will implement the model described in the revised version of ISO 19111. 
	
	
	 
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Basic encoding for coordinate system axis objects, simplifying and restricting the DefinitionType as needed. 
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
						 
							 The name by which this coordinate system axis is identified. 
						
					
				
				 
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Definition of a coordinate system axis. 
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 Set of alternative identifications of this coordinate system axis. The first axisID, if any, is normally the primary identification code, and any others are aliases. 
						
					
					 
						 
							 Comments on or information about this coordinate system axis, including data source information. 
						
					
					 
					 
				
				 
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 An identification of a coordinate system axis. 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 The abbreviation used for this coordinate system axis. This abbreviation can be used to identify the ordinates in a coordinate tuple. Examples are X and Y. The codeSpace attribute can reference a source of more information on a set of standardized abbreviations, or on this abbreviation. 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Direction of this coordinate system axis (or in the case of Cartesian projected coordinates, the direction of this coordinate system axis at the origin). Examples: north or south, east or west, up or down. Within any set of coordinate system axes, only one of each pair of terms can be used. For earth-fixed CRSs, this direction is often approximate and intended to provide a human interpretable meaning to the axis. When a geodetic datum is used, the precise directions of the axes may therefore vary slightly from this approximate direction. Note that an EngineeringCRS can include specific descriptions of the directions of its coordinate system axes. For example, the path of a linear CRS axis can be referenced in another document, such as referencing a GML feature that references or includes a curve geometry. The codeSpace attribute can reference a source of more information on a set of standardized directions, or on this direction. 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Identifier of the unit of measure used for this coordinate system axis. The value of this coordinate in a coordinate tuple shall be recorded using this unit of measure, whenever those coordinates use a coordinate reference system that uses a coordinate system that uses this axis.
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Association to a coordinate system axis, either referencing or containing the definition of that axis. 
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Basic encoding for coordinate system objects, simplifying and restricting the DefinitionType as needed. 
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
				
				 
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 The name by which this coordinate system is identified. 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 A coordinate system (CS) is the set of coordinate system axes that spans a given coordinate space. A CS is derived from a set of (mathematical) rules for specifying how coordinates in a given space are to be assigned to points. The coordinate values in a coordinate tuple shall be recorded in the order in which the coordinate system axes associations are recorded, whenever those coordinates use a coordinate reference system that uses this coordinate system. This abstract complexType shall not be used, extended, or restricted, in an Application Schema, to define a concrete subtype with a meaning equivalent to a concrete subtype specified in this document. 
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 Set of alternative identifications of this coordinate system. The first csID, if any, is normally the primary identification code, and any others are aliases. 
						
					
					 
						 
							 Comments on or information about this coordinate system, including data source information. 
						
					
					 
						 
							 Ordered sequence of associations to the coordinate system axes included in this coordinate system. 
						
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 An identification of a coordinate system. 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Association to a coordinate system axis. 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Association to a coordinate system, either referencing or containing the definition of that coordinate system. 
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A two- or three-dimensional coordinate system in which position is specified by geodetic latitude, geodetic longitude, and (in the three-dimensional case) ellipsoidal height. An EllipsoidalCS shall have two or three usesAxis associations. 
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Association to an ellipsoidal coordinate system, either referencing or containing the definition of that coordinate system. 
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A 1-, 2-, or 3-dimensional coordinate system. Gives the position of points relative to orthogonal straight axes in the 2- and 3-dimensional cases. In the 1-dimensional case, it contains a single straight coordinate axis. In the multi-dimensional case, all axes shall have the same length unit of measure. A CartesianCS shall have one, two, or three usesAxis associations. 
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Association to a Cartesian coordinate system, either referencing or containing the definition of that coordinate system. 
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A one-dimensional coordinate system used to record the heights (or depths) of points. Such a coordinate system is usually dependent on the Earth's gravity field, perhaps loosely as when atmospheric pressure is the basis for the vertical coordinate system axis. A VerticalCS shall have one usesAxis association. 
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Association to a vertical coordinate system, either referencing or containing the definition of that coordinate system. 
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A one-dimensional coordinate system containing a single time axis, used to describe the temporal position of a point in the specified time units from a specified time origin. A TemporalCS shall have one usesAxis association. 
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Association to a temporal coordinate system, either referencing or containing the definition of that coordinate system. 
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A one-dimensional coordinate system that consists of the points that lie on the single axis described. The associated ordinate is the distance from the specified origin to the point along the axis. Example: usage of the line feature representing a road to describe points on or along that road. A LinearCS shall have one usesAxis association. 
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Association to a linear coordinate system, either referencing or containing the definition of that coordinate system. 
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A two- or three-dimensional coordinate system that consists of any combination of coordinate axes not covered by any other coordinate system type. An example is a multilinear coordinate system which contains one coordinate axis that may have any 1-D shape which has no intersections with itself. This non-straight axis is supplemented by one or two straight axes to complete a 2 or 3 dimensional coordinate system. The non-straight axis is typically incrementally straight or curved. A UserDefinedCS shall have two or three usesAxis associations. 
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Association to a user-defined coordinate system, either referencing or containing the definition of that coordinate system. 
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A three-dimensional coordinate system with one distance measured from the origin and two angular coordinates. Not to be confused with an ellipsoidal coordinate system based on an ellipsoid "degenerated" into a sphere. A SphericalCS shall have three usesAxis associations. 
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Association to a spherical coordinate system, either referencing or containing the definition of that coordinate system. 
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A two-dimensional coordinate system in which position is specified by the distance from the origin and the angle between the line from the origin to a point and a reference direction. A PolarCS shall have two usesAxis associations. 
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Association to a polar coordinate system, either referencing or containing the definition of that coordinate system. 
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A three-dimensional coordinate system consisting of a polar coordinate system extended by a straight coordinate axis perpendicular to the plane spanned by the polar coordinate system. A CylindricalCS shall have three usesAxis associations. 
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Association to a cylindrical coordinate system, either referencing or containing the definition of that coordinate system. 
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A two- or three-dimensional coordinate system with straight axes that are not necessarily orthogonal. An ObliqueCartesianCS shall have two or three usesAxis associations. 
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Association to an oblique-Cartesian coordinate system, either referencing or containing the definition of that coordinate system. 
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	




GML-3.1.1/base/coverage.xsd
 
	 
		 coverage.xsd
		 GML Coverage schema. 
        Copyright (c) 2005 OGC, All Rights Reserved.
	For conditions, see OGC Software Notice http://www.opengeospatial.org/about/?page=ipr
	
	
	 
	 
	 
	 
	
	
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Abstract element which acts as the head of a substitution group for coverages. Note that a coverage is a GML feature.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
				
				 
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A continuous coverage as defined in ISO 19123 is a coverage that can return different values for the same feature attribute at different direct positions within a single spatiotemporal object in its spatiotemporal domain
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A discrete coverage consists of a domain set, range set and optionally a coverage function. The domain set consists of either geometry or temporal objects, finite in number. The range set is comprised of a finite number of attribute values each of which is associated to every direct position within any single spatiotemporal object in the domain. In other words, the range values are constant on each spatiotemporal object in the domain. This coverage function maps each element from the coverage domain to an element in its range. This definition conforms to ISO 19123.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 The spatiotemporal domain of a coverage.  
  Typically 
  * a geometry collection, 
  * an implicit geometry (e.g. a grid), 
  * an explicit or implicit collection of time instances or periods, or

N.B. Temporal geometric complexes and temporal grids are not yet implemented in GML.
		
		 
			 
				 
				 
			
		
		 
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 
				 
					 each member _Value holds a tuple or "row" from the equivalent table
				
			
			 
				 
					 each list holds the complete set of one scalar component from the values - i.e. a "column" from the equivalent table
				
			
			 
				 
					 Its tuple list holds the values as space-separated tuples each of which contains comma-separated components, and the tuple structure is specified using the rangeParameters property.
				
			
			 
				 
					 a reference to an external source for the data, together with a description of how that external source is structured
				
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 The function or rule which defines the map from members of the domainSet to the range.  
      More functions will be added to this list
		
		 
			 
			 
		
	
	
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 
			 
				 
				 
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 List of codes that identifies the file structure model for records stored in files.
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Metadata about the rangeSet.  Definition of record structure.   
      This is required if the rangeSet is encoded in a DataBlock.  
      We use a gml:_Value with empty values as a map of the composite value structure.
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	
	
	 
		 
			 Description of a rule for associating members from the domainSet with members of the rangeSet.
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Defines how values in the domain are mapped to the range set. The start point and the sequencing rule are specified here.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 If absent, the implied value is "Linear".
				
			
			 
				 
					 Index position of the first grid post, which must lie somwhere in the GridEnvelope.  If absent, the startPoint is equal to the value of gridEnvelope::low from the grid definition.
				
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Exends GridFunctionType with a lookUpTable.  This contains a list of indexes of members within the rangeSet corresponding with the members of the domainSet.  The domainSet is traversed in list order if it is enumerated explicitly, or in the order specified by a SequenceRule if the domain is an implicit set.    The length of the lookUpTable corresponds with the length of the subset of the domainSet for which the coverage is defined.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
				 
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 List of codes (adopted from ISO 19123 Annex C) that identifies the rule for traversing a grid to correspond with the sequence of members of the rangeSet.
		
		 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 The enumeration value here indicates the incrementation order  to be used on the first 2 axes, i.e. "+x-y" means that the points on the first axis are to be traversed from lowest to highest and  the points on the second axis are to be traversed from highest to lowest. The points on all other axes (if any) beyond the first 2 are assumed to increment from lowest to highest.
		
		 
			 
			 
			 
			 
		
	
	
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A discrete coverage type whose domain is defined by a collection of point
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
					 
					 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 
				 
					 
				
				 
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A discrete coverage type whose domain is defined by a collection of curves.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
					 
					 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 
				 
					 
				
				 
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A discrete coverage type whose domain is defined by a collection of surface patches (includes polygons, triangles, rectangles, etc).
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
					 
					 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 
				 
					 
				
				 
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A discrete coverage type whose domain is defined by a collection of Solids.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
					 
					 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 
				 
					 
				
				 
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
					 
					 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 
				 
					 
				
				 
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
					 
					 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 
				 
					 
				
				 
			
		
	
	




GML-3.1.1/base/dataQuality.xsd
 
	 
		 
		 How to encode positional data quality information. Builds on units.xsd to encode the data needed to describe the positional accuracy of coordinate operations. 
		Copyright (c) 2002-2005 OGC, All Rights Reserved. For conditions, see OGC Software Notice http://www.opengeospatial.org/about/?page=ipr
		This schema encodes the Data Quality (DQ) package of the extended UML Model for OGC Abstract Specification Topic 2: Spatial Referencing by Coordinates. That UML model is adapted from ISO 19111 - Spatial referencing by coordinates, as described in Annex C of Topic 2. 
		Caution: The CRS package in GML 3.1 and GML 3.1.1 is preliminary, and is expected to undergo some modifications that are not backward compatible during the development of GML 3.2 (ISO 19136). The GML 3.2 package will implement the model described in the revised version of ISO 19111. 
	
	
	 
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Position error estimate (or accuracy) data. 
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 A description of the position accuracy parameter(s) provided. 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Closeness of reported coordinate values to values accepted as or being true. 
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Closeness of the relative positions of two or more positions to their respective relative positions accepted as or being true. 
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 A quantitative result defined by the evaluation procedure used, and identified by the measureDescription. 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Error estimate covariance matrix. 
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 Ordered sequence of units of measure, corresponding to the row and column index numbers of the covariance matrix, starting with row and column 1 and ending with row/column N. Each unit of measure is for the ordinate reflected in the relevant row and column of the covariance matrix. 
						
					
					 
						 
							 Unordered set of elements in this covariance matrix. Because the covariance matrix is symmetrical, only the elements in the upper or lower diagonal part (including the main diagonal) of the matrix need to be specified. Any zero valued covariance elements can be omitted. 
						
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 An element of a covariance matrix.
		
		 
			 
			 
			 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Row number of this covariance element value. 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Column number of this covariance element value. 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Value of covariance matrix element. 
		
	
	




GML-3.1.1/base/datums.xsd
 
	 
		 
		 How to encode datum definitions. Builds on referenceSystems.xsd to encode the data needed to define datums, including the specific subtypes of datums. 
		Copyright (c) 2002-2005 OGC, All Rights Reserved. For conditions, see OGC Software Notice http://www.opengeospatial.org/about/?page=ipr
		This schema encodes the Datum (CD_) package of the extended UML Model for OGC Abstract Specification Topic 2: Spatial Referencing by Coordinates. That UML model is adapted from ISO 19111 - Spatial referencing by coordinates, as described in Annex C of Topic 2. 
		Caution: The CRS package in GML 3.1 and GML 3.1.1 is preliminary, and is expected to undergo some modifications that are not backward compatible during the development of GML 3.2 (ISO 19136). The GML 3.2 package will implement the model described in the revised version of ISO 19111. 
	
	
	 
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Basic encoding for datum objects, simplifying and restricting the DefinitionType as needed. 
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
				
				 
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 The name by which this datum is identified. 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 A datum specifies the relationship of a coordinate system to the earth, thus creating a coordinate reference system. A datum uses a parameter or set of parameters that determine the location of the origin of the coordinate reference system. Each datum subtype can be associated with only specific types of coordinate systems. This abstract complexType shall not be used, extended, or restricted, in an Application Schema, to define a concrete subtype with a meaning equivalent to a concrete subtype specified in this document. 
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 Set of alternative identifications of this datum. The first datumID, if any, is normally the primary identification code, and any others are aliases. 
						
					
					 
						 
							 Comments on this reference system, including source information. 
						
					
					 
					 
					 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 An identification of a datum. 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Description, possibly including coordinates, of the point or points used to anchor the datum to the Earth. Also known as the "origin", especially for engineering and image datums. The codeSpace attribute can be used to reference a source of more detailed on this point or surface, or on a set of such descriptions. 
- For a geodetic datum, this point is also known as the fundamental point, which is traditionally the point where the relationship between geoid and ellipsoid is defined. In some cases, the "fundamental point" may consist of a number of points. In those cases, the parameters defining the geoid/ellipsoid relationship have been averaged for these points, and the averages adopted as the datum definition.
- For an engineering datum, the anchor point may be a physical point, or it may be a point with defined coordinates in another CRS. When appropriate, the coordinates of this anchor point can be referenced in another document, such as referencing a GML feature that references or includes a point position.
- For an image datum, the anchor point is usually either the centre of the image or the corner of the image.
- For a temporal datum, this attribute is not defined. Instead of the anchor point, a temporal datum carries a separate time origin of type DateTime. 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 The time after which this datum definition is valid. This time may be precise (e.g. 1997.0 for IRTF97) or merely a year (e.g. 1983 for NAD83). In the latter case, the epoch usually refers to the year in which a major recalculation of the geodetic control network, underlying the datum, was executed or initiated. An old datum can remain valid after a new datum is defined. Alternatively, a datum may be superseded by a later datum, in which case the realization epoch for the new datum defines the upper limit for the validity of the superseded datum. 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Association to a datum, either referencing or containing the definition of that datum. 
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 An engineering datum defines the origin of an engineering coordinate reference system, and is used in a region around that origin. This origin can be fixed with respect to the earth (such as a defined point at a construction site), or be a defined point on a moving vehicle (such as on a ship or satellite). 
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Association to an engineering datum, either referencing or containing the definition of that datum. 
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 An image datum defines the origin of an image coordinate reference system, and is used in a local context only. For more information, see OGC Abstract Specification Topic 2. 
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Specification of the way an image grid is associated with the image data attributes. 
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 Reference to a source of information specifying the values and meanings of all the allowed string values for this PixelInCellType. 
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Association to an image datum, either referencing or containing the definition of that datum. 
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A textual description and/or a set of parameters identifying a particular reference level surface used as a zero-height surface, including its position with respect to the Earth for any of the height types recognized by this standard. There are several types of Vertical Datums, and each may place constraints on the Coordinate Axis with which it is combined to create a Vertical CRS. 
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Type of a vertical datum. 
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 Reference to a source of information specifying the values and meanings of all the allowed string values for this VerticalDatumTypeType. 
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Association to a vertical datum, either referencing or containing the definition of that datum. 
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Partially defines the origin of a temporal coordinate reference system. This type restricts the AbstractDatumType to remove the "anchorPoint" and "realizationEpoch" elements. 
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
					 
					 
					 
				
				 
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Defines the origin of a temporal coordinate reference system. This type extends the TemporalDatumRestrictionType to add the "origin" element with the dateTime type. 
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 The date and time origin of this temporal datum. 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Association to a temporal datum, either referencing or containing the definition of that datum. 
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A geodetic datum defines the precise location and orientation in 3-dimensional space of a defined ellipsoid (or sphere) that approximates the shape of the earth, or of a Cartesian coordinate system centered in this ellipsoid (or sphere). 
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Association to the prime meridian used by this geodetic datum. 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Association to the ellipsoid used by this geodetic datum. 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Association to a geodetic datum, either referencing or containing the definition of that datum. 
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Basic encoding for prime meridian objects, simplifying and restricting the DefinitionType as needed. 
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
				
				 
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 The name by which this prime meridian is identified. The meridianName most common value is Greenwich, and that value shall be used when the greenwichLongitude value is zero. 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 A prime meridian defines the origin from which longitude values are determined.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 Set of alternative identifications of this prime meridian. The first meridianID, if any, is normally the primary identification code, and any others are aliases. 
						
					
					 
						 
							 Comments on or information about this prime meridian, including source information. 
						
					
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 An identification of a prime meridian. 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Longitude of the prime meridian measured from the Greenwich meridian, positive eastward. The greenwichLongitude most common value is zero, and that value shall be used when the meridianName value is Greenwich. 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Association to a prime meridian, either referencing or containing the definition of that meridian. 
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Basic encoding for ellipsoid objects, simplifying and restricting the DefinitionType as needed. 
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
				
				 
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 The name by which this ellipsoid is identified. 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 An ellipsoid is a geometric figure that can be used to describe the approximate shape of the earth. In mathematical terms, it is a surface formed by the rotation of an ellipse about its minor axis.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 Set of alternative identifications of this ellipsoid. The first ellipsoidID, if any, is normally the primary identification code, and any others are aliases. 
						
					
					 
						 
							 Comments on or information about this ellipsoid, including source information. 
						
					
					 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 An identification of an ellipsoid. 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Length of the semi-major axis of the ellipsoid, with its units. Uses the MeasureType with the restriction that the unit of measure referenced by uom must be suitable for a length, such as metres or feet. 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Association to an ellipsoid, either referencing or containing the definition of that ellipsoid. 
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Definition of the second parameter that defines the shape of an ellipsoid. An ellipsoid requires two defining parameters: semi-major axis and inverse flattening or semi-major axis and semi-minor axis. When the reference body is a sphere rather than an ellipsoid, only a single defining parameter is required, namely the radius of the sphere; in that case, the semi-major axis "degenerates" into the radius of the sphere.
		
		 
			 
			 
			 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Inverse flattening value of the ellipsoid. Value is a scale factor (or ratio) that has no physical unit. Uses the MeasureType with the restriction that the unit of measure referenced by uom must be suitable for a scale factor, such as percent, permil, or parts-per-million. 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Length of the semi-minor axis of the ellipsoid. Uses the MeasureType with the restriction that the unit of measure referenced by uom must be suitable for a length, such as metres or feet. 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 The ellipsoid is degenerate and is actually a sphere. The sphere is completely defined by the semi-major axis, which is the radius of the sphere. 
		
		 
			 
				 
			
		
	
	




GML-3.1.1/base/defaultStyle.xsd
 
	 
		 defaultStyle.xsd
		 Default Style schema for GML 3.1.0
		Copyright (c) 2001-2005 OGC, All Rights Reserved. For conditions, see OGC Software Notice http://www.opengeospatial.org/about/?page=ipr
		Compliance: reference to ISO Specifications
	
	
	 
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Top-level property. Used in application schemas to "attach" the styling information to GML data. The link between the data and the style should be established through this property only.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 [complexType of] Top-level property. Used in application schemas to "attach" the styling information to GML data. The link between the data and the style should be established through this property only.
		
		 
			 
		
		 
		 
	
	
	 
		 
			 The value of the top-level property. It is an abstract element. Used as the head element of the substitution group for extensibility purposes.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 [complexType of] The value of the top-level property. It is an abstract element. Used as the head element of the substitution group for extensibility purposes.
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Predefined concrete value of the top-level property. Encapsulates all other styling information.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 [complexType of] Predefined concrete value of the top-level property. Encapsulates all other styling information.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
		
		 
			 
		
		 
		 
	
	
	 
		 
			 The style descriptor for features.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 [complexType of] The style descriptor for features.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
					 
					 
				
				 
				 
				 
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Used to specify the grammar of the feature query mechanism.
		
		 
			 
			 
			 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Base complex type for geometry, topology, label and graph styles.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
					 
					 
					 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
		
		 
			 
		
		 
		 
	
	
	 
		 
			 The style descriptor for geometries of a feature.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 [complexType of] The style descriptor for geometries of a feature.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
						 
							 
								 deprecated
								 Deprecated in GML version 3.1.0. Use symbol with inline content instead.
							
						
					
					 
				
				 
				 
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
		
		 
			 
		
		 
		 
	
	
	 
		 
			 The style descriptor for topologies of a feature. Describes individual topology elements styles.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 [complexType of] The style descriptor for topologies of a feature. Describes individual topology elements styles.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
						 
							 
								 deprecated
								 Deprecated in GML version 3.1.0. Use symbol with inline content instead.
							
						
					
					 
				
				 
				 
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
		
		 
			 
		
		 
		 
	
	
	 
		 
			 The style descriptor for labels of a feature, geometry or topology.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 [complexType of] The style descriptor for labels of a feature, geometry or topology.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
		
		 
			 
		
		 
		 
	
	
	 
		 
			 The style descriptor for a graph consisting of a number of features. Describes graph-specific style attributes.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 [complexType of] The style descriptor for a graph consisting of a number of features. Describes graph-specific style attributes.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
					 
					 
					 
					 
					 
					 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 The symbol property. Extends the gml:AssociationType to allow for remote referencing of symbols.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 [complexType of] The symbol property. Allows for remote referencing of symbols.
		
		 
			 
		
		 
		 
		 
		 
	
	
	 
		 
			 Used to specify the type of the symbol used.
		
		 
			 
			 
			 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Label is mixed -- composed of text and XPath expressions used to extract the useful information from the feature.
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	 
		 
			 Defines the geometric transformation of entities. There is no particular grammar defined for this value.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Used to vary individual graphic parameters and attributes of the style, symbol or text.
		
		 
			 
				 
				 
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Graph-specific styling property.
		
		 
			 
			 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Graph-specific styling property.
		
		 
			 
			 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Graph-specific styling property.
		
		 
			 
			 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Graph-specific styling property.
		
		 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
		
	




GML-3.1.1/base/dictionary.xsd
 
	 
		 
		 
			Dictionary schema for GML 3.1.1 
			Components to support the lists of definitions.  
    Copyright (c) 2005 OGC, All Rights Reserved.
	For conditions, see OGC Software Notice http://www.opengeospatial.org/about/?page=ipr
	
	
	 
	
	
	
	
	 
		 
			 This content model group makes it easier to construct types that 
      derive from DefinitionType and its descendents "by restriction".  
      A reference to the group saves having to enumerate the standard definition properties. 
      See definition of StandardObjectProperties for more documentation
		
		 
			 
			 
			 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A definition, which can be included in or referenced by a dictionary. In this extended type, the inherited "description" optional element can hold the definition whenever only text is needed. The inherited "name" elements can provide one or more brief terms for which this is the definition. The inherited "metaDataProperty" elements can be used to reference or include more information about this definition.  
The gml:id attribute is required - it must be possible to reference this definition using this handle.  
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
					 
				
				 
			
		
	
	
	 
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A non-abstract bag that is specialized for use as a dictionary which contains a set of definitions. These definitions are referenced from other places, in the same and different XML documents. In this restricted type, the inherited optional "description" element can be used for a description of this dictionary. The inherited optional "name" element can be used for the name(s) of this dictionary. The inherited "metaDataProperty" elements can be used to reference or contain more information about this dictionary. The inherited required gml:id attribute allows the dictionary to be referenced using this handle. 
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 
								 An entry in this dictionary. The content of an entry can itself be a lower level dictionary or definition collection. This element follows the standard GML property model, so the value may be provided directly or by reference. Note that if the value is provided by reference, this definition does not carry a handle (gml:id) in this context, so does not allow external references to this specific entry in this context. When used in this way the referenced definition will usually be in a dictionary in the same XML document. 
							
						
						 
							 
								 An identified reference to a remote entry in this dictionary, to be used when this entry should be identified to allow external references to this specific entry. 
							
						
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
	 
	
	 
		 
			 An entry in a dictionary of definitions. An instance of this type contains or refers to a definition object.  

The number of definitions contained in this dictionaryEntry is restricted to one, but a DefinitionCollection or Dictionary that contains multiple definitions can be substituted if needed. Specialized descendents of this dictionaryEntry might be restricted in an application schema to allow only including specified types of definitions as valid entries in a dictionary. 
		
		 
			 
				 
					 This element in a dictionary entry contains the actual definition. 
				
			
		
		 
			 
				 A non-identified reference to a remote entry in this dictionary, to be used when this entry need not be identified to allow external references to this specific entry. The remote entry referenced will usually be in a dictionary in the same XML document. This element will usually be used in dictionaries that are inside of another dictionary. 
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 An entry in a dictionary of definitions that contains a GML object which references a remote definition object. This entry is expected to be convenient in allowing multiple elements in one XML document to contain short (abbreviated XPointer) references, which are resolved to an external definition provided in a Dictionary element in the same XML document. Specialized descendents of this dictionaryEntry might be restricted in an application schema to allow only including specified types of definitions as valid entries in a dictionary. 
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A proxy entry in a dictionary of definitions. An element of this type contains a reference to a remote definition object. This entry is expected to be convenient in allowing multiple elements in one XML document to contain short (abbreviated XPointer) references, which are resolved to an external definition provided in a Dictionary element in the same XML document. 
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 A reference to a remote entry in this dictionary, used when this dictionary entry is identified to allow external references to this specific entry. The remote entry referenced can be in a dictionary in the same or different XML document. 
						
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
	




GML-3.1.1/base/direction.xsd
 
	 
		 direction.xsd
		 This schema defines "direction" element and type.
    Copyright (c) 2002-2005 OGC, All Rights Reserved.
	For conditions, see OGC Software Notice http://www.opengeospatial.org/about/?page=ipr
	
	
	 
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 
		
		 
			 
			 
			 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Direction expressed as a vector, either using components, or using angles.
		
		 
			 
			 
				 
				 
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
		
	
	




GML-3.1.1/base/dynamicFeature.xsd
 
	 
		 
		 Basic support for tracking moving objects and objects with changing state.     
    Copyright (c) 2002-2005 OGC, All Rights Reserved.
	For conditions, see OGC Software Notice http://www.opengeospatial.org/about/?page=ipr
	
	
	 
	 
	
	 
	 
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A timeslice encapsulates the time-varying properties of a dynamic feature--it 
        must be extended to represent a timestamped projection of a feature. The dataSource 
        property describes how the temporal data was acquired.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 This type encapsulates various dynamic properties of moving objects        
             (points, lines, regions). It is useful for dealing with features whose        
             geometry or topology changes over time.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
					 
					 
					 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 The history relationship associates a feature with a sequence of TimeSlice instances.
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 The track of a moving object is a sequence of specialized timeslices        that indicate the status of the object.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
			 
			 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 A dynamic feature may possess a history and/or a timestamp.
		
		 
			 
				 
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 A dynamic feature collection may possess a history and/or a timestamp.
		
		 
			 
				 
			
		
	
	




GML-3.1.1/base/feature.xsd
 
	 
		 
		 GML Feature schema. 		      
    Copyright (c) 2001-2005 OGC, All Rights Reserved.
	For conditions, see OGC Software Notice http://www.opengeospatial.org/about/?page=ipr
	
	
	
	
	 
	 
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 An abstract feature provides a set of common properties, including id, metaDataProperty, name and description inherited from AbstractGMLType, plus boundedBy.    A concrete feature type must derive from this type and specify additional  properties in an application schema. A feature must possess an identifying attribute ('id' - 'fid' has been deprecated).
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
						 
							 deprecated
							 deprecated in GML version 3.1
						
					
					
				
			
		
	
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Bounding shape.
		
		 
			 
				 
				 
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Envelope that includes also a temporal extent.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
				
				 
			
		
	
	
	
	 
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Container for a feature - follow gml:AssociationType pattern.
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Container for features - follow gml:ArrayAssociationType pattern.
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A feature collection contains zero or more features.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Concrete generic feature collection.
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	
	 
	 
	
	
	 
	 
	 
	 
	 
	
	
	 
		 
			 Makes boundedBy mandatory
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
					 
						 
							 deprecated
							 deprecated in GML version 3.1
						
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Deprecated in GML 3.1.0
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Convenience property for generalised location.  
      A representative location for plotting or analysis.  
      Often augmented by one or more additional geometry properties with more specific semantics.
			 Deprecated in GML 3.1.0
		
		 
			 
				 
				 
				 
				 
			
		
		 
	
	
	 
		 
			 Deprecated in GML 3.1.0
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 G-XML component
			 Deprecated in GML 3.1.0
		
		 
			 
				 
			
		
	
	




GML-3.1.1/base/geometryAggregates.xsd
 
	 
		 geometryAggregates.xsd
		 Copyright (c) 2001-2005 OGC, All Rights Reserved.
	For conditions, see OGC Software Notice http://www.opengeospatial.org/about/?page=ipr
	
	 
	
	
	
	
	 
		 
			 The "_GeometricAggregate" element is the abstract head of the substituition group for all geometric aggremates.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 This is the abstract root type of the geometric aggregates.
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A geometry collection must include one or more geometries, referenced through geometryMember elements.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 The members of the geometric aggregate can be specified either using the "standard" property or the array property style. It is also valid to use both the "standard" and the array property style in the same collection.
NOTE: Array properties cannot reference remote geometry elements.
					
					 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
					
				
			
			 This property element either references a geometric aggregate via the XLink-attributes or contains the "multi geometry" element. multiGeometryProperty is the predefined property which can be used by GML Application Schemas whenever a GML Feature has a property with a value that is substitutable for _GeometricAggregate.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 A property that has a geometric aggregate as its value domain can either be an appropriate geometry element encapsulated in an element of this type or an XLink reference to a remote geometry element (where remote includes geometry elements located elsewhere in the same document). Either the reference or the contained element must be given, but neither both nor none.
		
		 
			 
		
		 
			 
				 This attribute group includes the XLink attributes (see xlinks.xsd). XLink is used in GML to reference remote resources (including those elsewhere in the same document). A simple link element can be constructed by including a specific set of XLink attributes. The XML Linking Language (XLink) is currently a Proposed Recommendation of the World Wide Web Consortium. XLink allows elements to be inserted into XML documents so as to create sophisticated links between resources; such links can be used to reference remote properties.
A simple link element can be used to implement pointer functionality, and this functionality has been built into various GML 3 elements by including the gml:AssociationAttributeGroup.
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A MultiPoint is defined by one or more Points, referenced through pointMember elements.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 The members of the geometric aggregate can be specified either using the "standard" property or the array property style. It is also valid to use both the "standard" and the array property style in the same collection.
NOTE: Array properties cannot reference remote geometry elements.
					
					 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
					
				
			
			 This property element either references a point aggregate via the XLink-attributes or contains the "multi point" element. multiPointProperty is the predefined property which can be used by GML Application Schemas whenever a GML Feature has a property with a value that is substitutable for MultiPoint.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 A property that has a collection of points as its value domain can either be an appropriate geometry element encapsulated in an element of this type or an XLink reference to a remote geometry element (where remote includes geometry elements located elsewhere in the same document). Either the reference or the contained element must be given, but neither both nor none.
		
		 
			 
		
		 
			 
				 This attribute group includes the XLink attributes (see xlinks.xsd). XLink is used in GML to reference remote resources (including those elsewhere in the same document). A simple link element can be constructed by including a specific set of XLink attributes. The XML Linking Language (XLink) is currently a Proposed Recommendation of the World Wide Web Consortium. XLink allows elements to be inserted into XML documents so as to create sophisticated links between resources; such links can be used to reference remote properties.
A simple link element can be used to implement pointer functionality, and this functionality has been built into various GML 3 elements by including the gml:AssociationAttributeGroup.
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A MultiCurve is defined by one or more Curves, referenced through curveMember elements.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 The members of the geometric aggregate can be specified either using the "standard" property or the array property style. It is also valid to use both the "standard" and the array property style in the same collection.
NOTE: Array properties cannot reference remote geometry elements.
					
					 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
					
				
			
			 This property element either references a curve aggregate via the XLink-attributes or contains the "multi curve" element. multiCurveProperty is the predefined property which can be used by GML Application Schemas whenever a GML Feature has a property with a value that is substitutable for MultiCurve.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 A property that has a collection of curves as its value domain can either be an appropriate geometry element encapsulated in an element of this type or an XLink reference to a remote geometry element (where remote includes geometry elements located elsewhere in the same document). Either the reference or the contained element must be given, but neither both nor none.
		
		 
			 
		
		 
			 
				 This attribute group includes the XLink attributes (see xlinks.xsd). XLink is used in GML to reference remote resources (including those elsewhere in the same document). A simple link element can be constructed by including a specific set of XLink attributes. The XML Linking Language (XLink) is currently a Proposed Recommendation of the World Wide Web Consortium. XLink allows elements to be inserted into XML documents so as to create sophisticated links between resources; such links can be used to reference remote properties.
A simple link element can be used to implement pointer functionality, and this functionality has been built into various GML 3 elements by including the gml:AssociationAttributeGroup.
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A MultiSurface is defined by one or more Surfaces, referenced through surfaceMember elements.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 The members of the geometric aggregate can be specified either using the "standard" property or the array property style. It is also valid to use both the "standard" and the array property style in the same collection.
NOTE: Array properties cannot reference remote geometry elements.
					
					 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
					
				
			
			 This property element either references a surface aggregate via the XLink-attributes or contains the "multi surface" element. multiSurfaceProperty is the predefined property which can be used by GML Application Schemas whenever a GML Feature has a property with a value that is substitutable for MultiSurface.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 A property that has a collection of surfaces as its value domain can either be an appropriate geometry element encapsulated in an element of this type or an XLink reference to a remote geometry element (where remote includes geometry elements located elsewhere in the same document). Either the reference or the contained element must be given, but neither both nor none.
		
		 
			 
		
		 
			 
				 This attribute group includes the XLink attributes (see xlinks.xsd). XLink is used in GML to reference remote resources (including those elsewhere in the same document). A simple link element can be constructed by including a specific set of XLink attributes. The XML Linking Language (XLink) is currently a Proposed Recommendation of the World Wide Web Consortium. XLink allows elements to be inserted into XML documents so as to create sophisticated links between resources; such links can be used to reference remote properties.
A simple link element can be used to implement pointer functionality, and this functionality has been built into various GML 3 elements by including the gml:AssociationAttributeGroup.
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A MultiSolid is defined by one or more Solids, referenced through solidMember elements.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 The members of the geometric aggregate can be specified either using the "standard" property or the array property style. It is also valid to use both the "standard" and the array property style in the same collection.
NOTE: Array properties cannot reference remote geometry elements.
					
					 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
					
				
			
			 This property element either references a solid aggregate via the XLink-attributes or contains the "multi solid" element. multiSolidProperty is the predefined property which can be used by GML Application Schemas whenever a GML Feature has a property with a value that is substitutable for MultiSolid.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 A property that has a collection of solids as its value domain can either be an appropriate geometry element encapsulated in an element of this type or an XLink reference to a remote geometry element (where remote includes geometry elements located elsewhere in the same document). Either the reference or the contained element must be given, but neither both nor none.
		
		 
			 
		
		 
			 
				 This attribute group includes the XLink attributes (see xlinks.xsd). XLink is used in GML to reference remote resources (including those elsewhere in the same document). A simple link element can be constructed by including a specific set of XLink attributes. The XML Linking Language (XLink) is currently a Proposed Recommendation of the World Wide Web Consortium. XLink allows elements to be inserted into XML documents so as to create sophisticated links between resources; such links can be used to reference remote properties.
A simple link element can be used to implement pointer functionality, and this functionality has been built into various GML 3 elements by including the gml:AssociationAttributeGroup.
			
		
	
	
	
	
	 
		 
			 Deprecated with GML 3.0 and included for backwards compatibility with GML 2. Use the "MultiSurface" element instead.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Deprecated with GML 3.0 and included for backwards compatibility with GML 2. Use the "MultiCurve" element instead.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 A MultiLineString is defined by one or more LineStrings, referenced through lineStringMember elements. Deprecated with GML version 3.0. Use MultiCurveType instead.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 This type is deprecated with GML 3 and shall not be used. It is included for backwards compatibility with GML 2. Use MultiCurvePropertyType instead.
A property that has a collection of line strings as its value domain can either be an appropriate geometry element encapsulated in an element of this type or an XLink reference to a remote geometry element (where remote includes geometry elements located elsewhere in the same document). Either the reference or the contained element must be given, but neither both nor none.
		
		 
			 
		
		 
			 
				 This attribute group includes the XLink attributes (see xlinks.xsd). XLink is used in GML to reference remote resources (including those elsewhere in the same document). A simple link element can be constructed by including a specific set of XLink attributes. The XML Linking Language (XLink) is currently a Proposed Recommendation of the World Wide Web Consortium. XLink allows elements to be inserted into XML documents so as to create sophisticated links between resources; such links can be used to reference remote properties.
A simple link element can be used to implement pointer functionality, and this functionality has been built into various GML 3 elements by including the gml:AssociationAttributeGroup.
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 A MultiPolygon is defined by one or more Polygons, referenced through polygonMember elements. Deprecated with GML version 3.0. Use MultiSurfaceType instead.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 This type is deprecated with GML 3 and shall not be used. It is included for backwards compatibility with GML 2. Use MultiSurfacePropertyType instead.

A property that has a collection of polygons as its value domain can either be an appropriate geometry element encapsulated in an element of this type or an XLink reference to a remote geometry element (where remote includes geometry elements located elsewhere in the same document). Either the reference or the contained element must be given, but neither both nor none.
		
		 
			 
		
		 
			 
				 This attribute group includes the XLink attributes (see xlinks.xsd). XLink is used in GML to reference remote resources (including those elsewhere in the same document). A simple link element can be constructed by including a specific set of XLink attributes. The XML Linking Language (XLink) is currently a Proposed Recommendation of the World Wide Web Consortium. XLink allows elements to be inserted into XML documents so as to create sophisticated links between resources; such links can be used to reference remote properties.
A simple link element can be used to implement pointer functionality, and this functionality has been built into various GML 3 elements by including the gml:AssociationAttributeGroup.
			
		
	
	
	
	 
		 
			 This property element either references a geometry element via the XLink-attributes or contains the geometry element.
		
	
	 
		 
			 This property element contains a list of geometry elements. The order of the elements is significant and shall be preserved when processing the array.
		
	
	 
		 
			 This property element either references a Point via the XLink-attributes or contains the Point element.
		
	
	 
		 
			 This property element contains a list of points. The order of the elements is significant and shall be preserved when processing the array.
		
	
	 
		 
			 This property element contains a list of curves. The order of the elements is significant and shall be preserved when processing the array.
		
	
	 
		 
			 This property element either references a surface via the XLink-attributes or contains the surface element. A surface element is any element which is substitutable for "_Surface".
		
	
	 
		 
			 This property element contains a list of surfaces. The order of the elements is significant and shall be preserved when processing the array.
		
	
	 
		 
			 This property element either references a solid via the XLink-attributes or contains the solid element. A solid element is any element which is substitutable for "_Solid".
		
	
	 
		 
			 This property element contains a list of solids. The order of the elements is significant and shall be preserved when processing the array.
		
	
	
	 
	 
	 
	 
	 
	 
	
	 
		 
			 deprecated
			 Deprecated with GML 3.0 and included only for backwards compatibility with GML 2.0. Use "curveMember" instead.
This property element either references a line string via the XLink-attributes or contains the line string element.
		
	
	 
		 
			 deprecated
			 Deprecated with GML 3.0 and included only for backwards compatibility with GML 2.0. Use "curveMember" instead.
This property element either references a line string via the XLink-attributes or contains the line string element.
		
	
	 
		 
			 deprecated
			 Deprecated with GML 3.0 and included only for backwards compatibility with GML 2.0. Use "surfaceMember" instead.
This property element either references a polygon via the XLink-attributes or contains the polygon element.
		
	
	




GML-3.1.1/base/geometryBasic0d1d.xsd
 
	 
		 geometryBasic0d1d.xsd
		 
			 Schematron validation
			 
				 
					 The presence of a dimension attribute implies the presence of the srsName attribute.
					 The presence of an axisLabels attribute implies the presence of the srsName attribute.
					 The presence of an uomLabels attribute implies the presence of the srsName attribute.
					 The presence of an uomLabels attribute implies the presence of the axisLabels attribute and vice versa.
				
			
			 
				 
					 The presence of a count attribute implies the presence of the dimension attribute.
				
			
		
		 Copyright (c) 2001-2005 OGC, All Rights Reserved.
	For conditions, see OGC Software Notice http://www.opengeospatial.org/about/?page=ipr
	
	
	 
		 
			 This includes not only measures.xsd, but also units.xsd, gmlBase.xsd and basicTypes.xsd.
		
	
	
	
	
	 
		 
			 The "_Geometry" element is the abstract head of the substituition group for all geometry elements of GML 3. This 
			includes pre-defined and user-defined geometry elements. Any geometry element must be a direct or indirect extension/restriction 
			of AbstractGeometryType and must be directly or indirectly in the substitution group of "_Geometry".
			 
				 
					 
						 
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 A geometric property can either be any geometry element encapsulated in an element of this type or an XLink reference 
			to a remote geometry element (where remote includes geometry elements located elsewhere in the same document). Note that either 
			the reference or the contained element must be given, but not both or none.
		
		 
			 
		
		 
			 
				 This attribute group includes the XLink attributes (see xlinks.xsd). XLink is used in GML to reference 
				remote resources (including those elsewhere in the same document). A simple link element can be constructed by 
				including a specific set of XLink attributes. The XML Linking Language (XLink) is currently a Proposed Recommendation 
				of the World Wide Web Consortium. XLink allows elements to be inserted into XML documents so as to create 
				sophisticated links between resources; such links can be used to reference remote properties. A simple link element 
				can be used to implement pointer functionality, and this functionality has been built into various GML 3 elements by 
				including the gml:AssociationAttributeGroup.
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 A container for an array of geometry elements. The elements are always contained in the array property, 
			referencing geometry elements or arrays of geometry elements is not supported.
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 All geometry elements are derived directly or indirectly from this abstract supertype. A geometry element may 
			have an identifying attribute ("gml:id"), a name (attribute "name") and a description (attribute "description"). It may be associated 
			with a spatial reference system (attribute "srsName"). The following rules shall be adhered: - Every geometry type shall derive 
			from this abstract type. - Every geometry element (i.e. an element of a geometry type) shall be directly or indirectly in the 
			substitution group of _Geometry.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 This attribute is included for backward compatibility with GML 2 and is deprecated with GML 3. 
						This identifer is superceded by "gml:id" inherited from AbstractGMLType. The attribute "gid" should not be used 
						anymore and may be deleted in future versions of GML without further notice.
					
				
				 
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Optional reference to the CRS used by this geometry, with optional additional information to simplify use when 
			a more complete definition of the CRS is not needed.
		
		 
			 
				 In general this reference points to a CRS instance of gml:CoordinateReferenceSystemType 
				(see coordinateReferenceSystems.xsd). For well known references it is not required that the CRS description exists at the 
				location the URI points to. If no srsName attribute is given, the CRS must be specified as part of the larger context this 
				geometry element is part of, e.g. a geometric element like point, curve, etc. It is expected that this attribute will be specified 
				at the direct position level only in rare cases.
			
		
		 
			 
				 The "srsDimension" is the length of coordinate sequence (the number of entries in the list). This dimension is 
				specified by the coordinate reference system. When the srsName attribute is omitted, this attribute shall be omitted.
			
		
		 
	
	
	 
		 
			 Optional additional and redundant information for a CRS to simplify use when a more complete definition of the 
			CRS is not needed. This information shall be the same as included in the more complete definition of the CRS, referenced by the 
			srsName attribute. When the srsName attribute is included, either both or neither of the axisLabels and uomLabels attributes 
			shall be included. When the srsName attribute is omitted, both of these attributes shall be omitted.
		
		 
			 
				 Ordered list of labels for all the axes of this CRS. The gml:axisAbbrev value should be used for these axis 
				labels, after spaces and forbiddden characters are removed. When the srsName attribute is included, this attribute is optional. 
				When the srsName attribute is omitted, this attribute shall also be omitted.
			
		
		 
			 
				 Ordered list of unit of measure (uom) labels for all the axes of this CRS. The value of the string in the 
				gml:catalogSymbol should be used for this uom labels, after spaces and forbiddden characters are removed. When the 
				axisLabels attribute is included, this attribute shall also be included. When the axisLabels attribute is omitted, this attribute 
				shall also be omitted.
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 The "_GeometricPrimitive" element is the abstract head of the substituition group for all (pre- and user-defined) 
			geometric primitives.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 This is the abstract root type of the geometric primitives. A geometric primitive is a geometric object that is not 
			decomposed further into other primitives in the system. All primitives are oriented in the direction implied by the sequence of their 
			coordinate tuples.
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 A property that has a geometric primitive as its value domain can either be an appropriate geometry element 
			encapsulated in an element of this type or an XLink reference to a remote geometry element (where remote includes geometry 
			elements located elsewhere in the same document). Either the reference or the contained element must be given, but neither 
			both nor none.
		
		 
			 
		
		 
			 
				 This attribute group includes the XLink attributes (see xlinks.xsd). XLink is used in GML to reference remote 
				resources (including those elsewhere in the same document). A simple link element can be constructed by including a 
				specific set of XLink attributes. The XML Linking Language (XLink) is currently a Proposed Recommendation of the World Wide 
				Web Consortium. XLink allows elements to be inserted into XML documents so as to create sophisticated links between 
				resources; such links can be used to reference remote properties. A simple link element can be used to implement pointer 
				functionality, and this functionality has been built into various GML 3 elements by including the gml:AssociationAttributeGroup.
			
		
	
	
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A Point is defined by a single coordinate tuple.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 GML supports two different ways to specify the direct poisiton of a point. 1. The "pos" element is of type 
							DirectPositionType.
						
						 
						 
							 
								 Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0 for coordinates with ordinate values that are numbers. Use "pos" 
								instead. The "coordinates" element shall only be used for coordinates with ordinates that require a string 
								representation, e.g. DMS representations.
							
						
						 
							 
								 Deprecated with GML version 3.0. Use "pos" instead. The "coord" element is included for 
								backwards compatibility with GML 2.
							
						
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
					
				
			
			 This property element either references a point via the XLink-attributes or contains the point element. pointProperty 
			is the predefined property which can be used by GML Application Schemas whenever a GML Feature has a property with a value that 
			is substitutable for Point.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use "pointProperty" instead. Included for backwards compatibility with GML 3.0.0.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 A property that has a point as its value domain can either be an appropriate geometry element encapsulated in an 
			element of this type or an XLink reference to a remote geometry element (where remote includes geometry elements located 
			elsewhere in the same document). Either the reference or the contained element must be given, but neither both nor none.
		
		 
			 
		
		 
			 
				 This attribute group includes the XLink attributes (see xlinks.xsd). XLink is used in GML to reference remote 
				resources (including those elsewhere in the same document). A simple link element can be constructed by including a specific 
				set of XLink attributes. The XML Linking Language (XLink) is currently a Proposed Recommendation of the World Wide Web Consortium. 
				XLink allows elements to be inserted into XML documents so as to create sophisticated links between resources; such links can be 
				used to reference remote properties. A simple link element can be used to implement pointer functionality, and this functionality has 
				been built into various GML 3 elements by including the gml:AssociationAttributeGroup.
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A container for an array of points. The elements are always contained in the array property, referencing geometry 
			elements or arrays of geometry elements is not supported.
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	
	
	 
		 
			 The "_Curve" element is the abstract head of the substituition group for all (continuous) curve elements.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 An abstraction of a curve to support the different levels of complexity. The curve can always be viewed as a geometric 
			primitive, i.e. is continuous.
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
					
				
			
			 This property element either references a curve via the XLink-attributes or contains the curve element. curveProperty is the 
			predefined property which can be used by GML Application Schemas whenever a GML Feature has a property with a value that is 
			substitutable for _Curve.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 A property that has a curve as its value domain can either be an appropriate geometry element encapsulated in an 
			element of this type or an XLink reference to a remote geometry element (where remote includes geometry elements located elsewhere 
			in the same document). Either the reference or the contained element must be given, but neither both nor none.
		
		 
			 
		
		 
			 
				 This attribute group includes the XLink attributes (see xlinks.xsd). XLink is used in GML to reference remote 
				resources (including those elsewhere in the same document). A simple link element can be constructed by including a specific 
				set of XLink attributes. The XML Linking Language (XLink) is currently a Proposed Recommendation of the World Wide Web Consortium. 
				XLink allows elements to be inserted into XML documents so as to create sophisticated links between resources; such links can be used 
				to reference remote properties. A simple link element can be used to implement pointer functionality, and this functionality has been built 
				into various GML 3 elements by including the gml:AssociationAttributeGroup.
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A container for an array of curves. The elements are always contained in the array property, referencing geometry elements 
			or arrays of geometry elements is not supported.
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A LineString is a special curve that consists of a single segment with linear interpolation. It is defined by two or more coordinate 
			tuples, with linear interpolation between them. It is backwards compatible with the LineString of GML 2, GM_LineString of ISO 19107 is 
			implemented by LineStringSegment.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 GML supports two different ways to specify the control points of a line string. 1. A sequence of "pos" 
							(DirectPositionType) or "pointProperty" (PointPropertyType) elements. "pos" elements are control points that are only part 
							of this curve, "pointProperty" elements contain a point that may be referenced from other geometry elements or reference 
							another point defined outside of this curve (reuse of existing points). 2. The "posList" element allows for a compact way to 
							specifiy the coordinates of the control points, if all control points are in the same coordinate reference systems and belong 
							to this curve only. The number of direct positions in the list must be at least two.
						
						 
							 
							 
							 
								 
									 Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use "pointProperty" instead. Included for backwards compatibility 
									with GML 3.0.0.
								
							
							 
								 
									 Deprecated with GML version 3.0. Use "pos" instead. The "coord" element is included for backwards 
									compatibility with GML 2.
								
							
						
						 
						 
							 
								 Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use "posList" instead.
							
						
					
				
			
		
	
	
	
	
	 
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 DirectPosition instances hold the coordinates for a position within some coordinate reference system (CRS). Since 
			DirectPositions, as data types, will often be included in larger objects (such as geometry elements) that have references to CRS, the 
			"srsName" attribute will in general be missing, if this particular DirectPosition is included in a larger element with such a reference to a 
			CRS. In this case, the CRS is implicitly assumed to take on the value of the containing object's CRS.
		
		 
			 
				 
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
					
				
			
			 
				 
					 
						 
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 DirectPositionList instances hold the coordinates for a sequence of direct positions within the same coordinate 
			reference system (CRS).
		
		 
			 
				 
				 
					 
						 "count" allows to specify the number of direct positions in the list. If the attribute count is present then 
						the attribute srsDimension shall be present, too.
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Vector instances hold the compoents for a (usually spatial) vector within some coordinate reference system (CRS). 
			Since Vectors will often be included in larger objects that have references to CRS, the "srsName" attribute may be missing. 
			In this case, the CRS is implicitly assumed to take on the value of the containing object's CRS.

			Note that this content model is the same as DirectPositionType, but is defined separately to reflect the distinct semantics, and to avoid validation problems. SJDC 2004-12-02
		
		 
			 
				 
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 A geometric position represented either by a DirectPosition or a Point.
		
		 
			 
			 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 A list of geometric positions represented either by a DirectPosition or a Point.
		
		 
			 
			 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0.
		
	
	
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Envelope defines an extent using a pair of positions defining opposite corners in arbitrary dimensions. The first direct 
			position is the "lower corner" (a coordinate position consisting of all the minimal ordinates for each dimension for all points within the envelope), 
			the second one the "upper corner" (a coordinate position consisting of all the maximal ordinates for each dimension for all points within the 
			envelope).
		
		 
			 
				 
				 
			
			 
				 
					 deprecated
					 deprecated with GML version 3.0
				
			
			 
				 
					 deprecated
					 Deprecated with GML version 3.1. Use the explicit properties "lowerCorner" and "upperCorner" instead.
				
			
			 
				 
					 Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use the explicit properties "lowerCorner" and "upperCorner" instead.
				
			
		
		 
	
	
	
	
	
	 
		 
			 Deprecated with GML 3.0 and included for backwards compatibility with GML 2. Use the "pos" element instead.
		
	
	 
		 
			 Represents a coordinate tuple in one, two, or three dimensions. Deprecated with GML 3.0 and replaced by 
			DirectPositionType.
		
		 
			 
			 
			 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Deprecated with GML 3.0 and included only for backwards compatibility with GML 2.0. Use "curveProperty" instead. This 
			property element either references a line string via the XLink-attributes or contains the line string element.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 This type is deprecated with GML 3 and shall not be used. It is included for backwards compatibility with GML 2. Use 
			CurvePropertyType instead. A property that has a line string as its value domain can either be an appropriate geometry element encapsulated 
			in an element of this type or an XLink reference to a remote geometry element (where remote includes geometry elements located elsewhere 
			in the same document). Either the reference or the contained element must be given, but neither both nor none.
		
		 
			 
		
		 
			 
				 This attribute group includes the XLink attributes (see xlinks.xsd). XLink is used in GML to reference remote resources 
				(including those elsewhere in the same document). A simple link element can be constructed by including a specific set of XLink attributes. 
				The XML Linking Language (XLink) is currently a Proposed Recommendation of the World Wide Web Consortium. XLink allows elements to 
				be inserted into XML documents so as to create sophisticated links between resources; such links can be used to reference remote properties. 
				A simple link element can be used to implement pointer functionality, and this functionality has been built into various GML 3 elements by 
				including the gml:AssociationAttributeGroup.
			
		
	
	




GML-3.1.1/base/geometryBasic2d.xsd
 
	 
		 geometryBasic2d.xsd
		 Copyright (c) 2001-2005 OGC, All Rights Reserved.
	For conditions, see OGC Software Notice http://www.opengeospatial.org/about/?page=ipr
	
	 
	
	
	
	 
		 
			 The "_Surface" element is the abstract head of the substituition group for all (continuous) surface elements.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 An abstraction of a surface to support the different levels of complexity. A surface is always a continuous region of a plane.
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
					
				
			
			 This property element either references a surface via the XLink-attributes or contains the surface element. surfaceProperty is the predefined property which can be used by GML Application Schemas whenever a GML Feature has a property with a value that is substitutable for _Surface.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 A property that has a surface as its value domain can either be an appropriate geometry element encapsulated in an element of this type or an XLink reference to a remote geometry element (where remote includes geometry elements located elsewhere in the same document). Either the reference or the contained element must be given, but neither both nor none.
		
		 
			 
		
		 
			 
				 This attribute group includes the XLink attributes (see xlinks.xsd). XLink is used in GML to reference remote resources (including those elsewhere in the same document). A simple link element can be constructed by including a specific set of XLink attributes. The XML Linking Language (XLink) is currently a Proposed Recommendation of the World Wide Web Consortium. XLink allows elements to be inserted into XML documents so as to create sophisticated links between resources; such links can be used to reference remote properties.
A simple link element can be used to implement pointer functionality, and this functionality has been built into various GML 3 elements by including the gml:AssociationAttributeGroup.
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A container for an array of surfaces. The elements are always contained in the array property, referencing geometry elements or arrays of geometry elements is not supported.
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A Polygon is a special surface that is defined by a single surface patch. The boundary of this patch is coplanar and the polygon uses planar interpolation in its interior. It is backwards compatible with the Polygon of GML 2, GM_Polygon of ISO 19107 is implemented by PolygonPatch.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	
	
	 
		 
			 The "_Ring" element is the abstract head of the substituition group for all closed boundaries of a surface patch.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 An abstraction of a ring to support surface boundaries of different complexity.
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 A boundary of a surface consists of a number of rings. In the normal 2D case, one of these rings is distinguished as being the exterior boundary. In a general manifold this is not always possible, in which case all boundaries shall be listed as interior boundaries, and the exterior will be empty.
		
	
	 
		 
			 A boundary of a surface consists of a number of rings. The "interior" rings seperate the surface / surface patch from the area enclosed by the rings.
		
	
	 
		 
			 Deprecated with GML 3.0, included only for backwards compatibility with GML 2. Use "exterior" instead.
		
	
	 
		 
			 Deprecated with GML 3.0, included only for backwards compatibility with GML 2. Use "interior" instead.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Encapsulates a ring to represent the surface boundary property of a surface.
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A LinearRing is defined by four or more coordinate tuples, with linear interpolation between them; the first and last coordinates must be coincident.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 GML supports two different ways to specify the control points of a linear ring.
1. A sequence of "pos" (DirectPositionType) or "pointProperty" (PointPropertyType) elements. "pos" elements are control points that are only part of this ring, "pointProperty" elements contain a point that may be referenced from other geometry elements or reference another point defined outside of this ring (reuse of existing points).
2. The "posList" element allows for a compact way to specifiy the coordinates of the control points, if all control points are in the same coordinate reference systems and belong to this ring only. The number of direct positions in the list must be at least four.
						
						 
							 
							 
							 
								 
									 Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use "pointProperty" instead. Included for backwards compatibility with GML 3.0.0.
								
							
						
						 
						 
							 
								 Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use "posList" instead.
							
						
						 
							 
								 Deprecated with GML version 3.0 and included for backwards compatibility with GML 2. Use "pos" elements instead.
							
						
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Encapsulates a ring to represent properties in features or geometry collections.
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	
	
	 
		 
			 Deprecated with GML 3.0 and included only for backwards compatibility with GML 2.0. Use "surfaceProperty" instead.
This property element either references a polygon via the XLink-attributes or contains the polygon element.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 This type is deprecated with GML 3 and shall not be used. It is included for backwards compatibility with GML 2. Use SurfacePropertyType instead.
A property that has a polygon as its value domain can either be an appropriate geometry element encapsulated in an element of this type or an XLink reference to a remote geometry element (where remote includes geometry elements located elsewhere in the same document). Either the reference or the contained element must be given, but neither both nor none.
		
		 
			 
		
		 
			 
				 This attribute group includes the XLink attributes (see xlinks.xsd). XLink is used in GML to reference remote resources (including those elsewhere in the same document). A simple link element can be constructed by including a specific set of XLink attributes. The XML Linking Language (XLink) is currently a Proposed Recommendation of the World Wide Web Consortium. XLink allows elements to be inserted into XML documents so as to create sophisticated links between resources; such links can be used to reference remote properties.
A simple link element can be used to implement pointer functionality, and this functionality has been built into various GML 3 elements by including the gml:AssociationAttributeGroup.
			
		
	
	




GML-3.1.1/base/geometryComplexes.xsd
 
	 
		 geometryComplexes.xsd
		 Copyright (c) 2001-2005 OGC, All Rights Reserved.
	For conditions, see OGC Software Notice http://www.opengeospatial.org/about/?page=ipr
	
	 
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A CompositeCurve is defined by a sequence of (orientable) curves such that the each curve in the sequence terminates at the start point of the subsequent curve in the list.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 This element references or contains one curve in the composite curve. The curves are contiguous, the collection of curves is ordered.
NOTE: This definition allows for a nested structure, i.e. a CompositeCurve may use, for example, another CompositeCurve as a curve member.
						
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A CompositeSurface is defined by a set of orientable surfaces. A composite surface is geometry type with all the geometric properties of a (primitive) surface. Essentially, a composite surface is a collection of surfaces that join in pairs on common boundary curves and which, when considered as a whole, form a single surface.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 This element references or contains one surface in the composite surface. The surfaces are contiguous.
NOTE: This definition allows for a nested structure, i.e. a CompositeSurface may use, for example, another CompositeSurface as a member.
						
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A composite solid is a geometry type with all the geometric properties of a (primitive) solid. 
				Essentially, a composite solid is a collection of solids that join in pairs on common boundary surfaces and which, when considered as a whole, form a single solid.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 
								 
									 
										 
									
								
							
							 This element references or contains one solid in the composite solid. The solids are contiguous.
NOTE: This definition allows for a nested structure, i.e. a CompositeSolid may use, for example, another CompositeSolid as a member.
						
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A geometric complex.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 A property that has a geometric complex as its value domain can either be an appropriate geometry element encapsulated in an element of this type or an XLink reference to a remote geometry element (where remote includes geometry elements located elsewhere in the same document). Either the reference or the contained element must be given, but neither both nor none.
NOTE: The allowed geometry elements contained in such a property (or referenced by it) have to be modelled by an XML Schema choice element since the composites inherit both from geometric complex *and* geometric primitive and are already part of the _GeometricPrimitive substitution group.
		
		 
			 
				 
				 
				 
				 
			
		
		 
			 
				 This attribute group includes the XLink attributes (see xlinks.xsd). XLink is used in GML to reference remote resources (including those elsewhere in the same document). A simple link element can be constructed by including a specific set of XLink attributes. The XML Linking Language (XLink) is currently a Proposed Recommendation of the World Wide Web Consortium. XLink allows elements to be inserted into XML documents so as to create sophisticated links between resources; such links can be used to reference remote properties.
A simple link element can be used to implement pointer functionality, and this functionality has been built into various GML 3 elements by including the gml:AssociationAttributeGroup.
			
		
	
	




GML-3.1.1/base/geometryPrimitives.xsd
 
	 
		 geometryPrimitives.xsd
		 Copyright (c) 2001-2005 OGC, All Rights Reserved.
	For conditions, see OGC Software Notice http://www.opengeospatial.org/about/?page=ipr
	
	
	 
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Curve is a 1-dimensional primitive. Curves are continuous, connected, and have a measurable length in terms of the coordinate system. 
				A curve is composed of one or more curve segments. Each curve segment within a curve may be defined using a different interpolation method. The curve segments are connected to one another, with the end point of each segment except the last being the start point of the next segment in the segment list.
				The orientation of the curve is positive.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 This element encapsulates the segments of the curve.
						
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
					
				
			
			 This property element either references a curve via the XLink-attributes or contains the curve element. A curve element is any element which is substitutable for "_Curve".
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 OrientableCurve consists of a curve and an orientation. If the orientation is "+", then the OrientableCurve is identical to the baseCurve. If the orientation is "-", then the OrientableCurve is related to another _Curve with a parameterization that reverses the sense of the curve traversal.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 References or contains the base curve (positive orientation).
NOTE: This definition allows for a nested structure, i.e. an OrientableCurve may use another OrientableCurve as its base curve.
						
					
				
				 
					 
						 If the orientation is "+", then the OrientableCurve is identical to the baseCurve. If the orientation is "-", then the OrientableCurve is related to another _Curve with a parameterization that reverses the sense of the curve traversal. "+" is the default value.
					
				
			
		
	
	
	
	
	
	 
		 
			 The "_CurveSegment" element is the abstract head of the substituition group for all curve segment elements, i.e. continuous segments of the same interpolation mechanism.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Curve segment defines a homogeneous segment of a curve.
		
		 
		 
			 
				 The attribute "numDerivativesAtStart" specifies the type of continuity between this curve segment and its predecessor. If this is the first curve segment in the curve, one of these values, as appropriate, is ignored. The default value of "0" means simple continuity, which is a mandatory minimum level of continuity. This level is referred to as "C 0 " in mathematical texts. A value of 1 means that the function and its first derivative are continuous at the appropriate end point: "C 1 " continuity. A value of "n" for any integer means the function and its first n derivatives are continuous: "C n " continuity.
NOTE: Use of these values is only appropriate when the basic curve definition is an underdetermined system. For example, line string segments cannot support continuity above C 0 , since there is no spare control parameter to adjust the incoming angle at the end points of the segment. Spline functions on the other hand often have extra degrees of freedom on end segments that allow them to adjust the values of the derivatives to support C 1 or higher continuity.
			
		
		 
			 
				 The attribute "numDerivativesAtEnd" specifies the type of continuity between this curve segment and its successor. If this is the last curve segment in the curve, one of these values, as appropriate, is ignored. The default value of "0" means simple continuity, which is a mandatory minimum level of continuity. This level is referred to as "C 0 " in mathematical texts. A value of 1 means that the function and its first derivative are continuous at the appropriate end point: "C 1 " continuity. A value of "n" for any integer means the function and its first n derivatives are continuous: "C n " continuity.
NOTE: Use of these values is only appropriate when the basic curve definition is an underdetermined system. For example, line string segments cannot support continuity above C 0 , since there is no spare control parameter to adjust the incoming angle at the end points of the segment. Spline functions on the other hand often have extra degrees of freedom on end segments that allow them to adjust the values of the derivatives to support C 1 or higher continuity.
			
		
		 
			 
				 The attribute "numDerivativesInterior" specifies the type of continuity that is guaranteed interior to the curve. The default value of "0" means simple continuity, which is a mandatory minimum level of continuity. This level is referred to as "C 0 " in mathematical texts. A value of 1 means that the function and its first derivative are continuous at the appropriate end point: "C 1 " continuity. A value of "n" for any integer means the function and its first n derivatives are continuous: "C n " continuity.
NOTE: Use of these values is only appropriate when the basic curve definition is an underdetermined system. For example, line string segments cannot support continuity above C 0 , since there is no spare control parameter to adjust the incoming angle at the end points of the segment. Spline functions on the other hand often have extra degrees of freedom on end segments that allow them to adjust the values of the derivatives to support C 1 or higher continuity.
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 This property element contains a list of curve segments. The order of the elements is significant and shall be preserved when processing the array.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 A container for an array of curve segments.
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A LineStringSegment is a curve segment that is defined by two or more coordinate tuples, with linear interpolation between them.
				Note: LineStringSegment implements GM_LineString of ISO 19107.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 GML supports two different ways to specify the control points of a curve segment.
1. A sequence of "pos" (DirectPositionType) or "pointProperty" (PointPropertyType) elements. "pos" elements are control points that are only part of this curve segment, "pointProperty" elements contain a point that may be referenced from other geometry elements or reference another point defined outside of this curve segment (reuse of existing points).
2. The "posList" element allows for a compact way to specifiy the coordinates of the control points, if all control points are in the same coordinate reference systems and belong to this curve segment only. The number of direct positions in the list must be at least two.
						
						 
							 
							 
							 
								 
									 Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use "pointProperty" instead. Included for backwards compatibility with GML 3.0.0.
								
							
						
						 
						 
							 
								 Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use "posList" instead.
							
						
					
				
				 
					 
						 The attribute "interpolation" specifies the curve interpolation mechanism used for this segment. This mechanism
uses the control points and control parameters to determine the position of this curve segment. For a LineStringSegment the interpolation is fixed as "linear".
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 An ArcString is a curve segment that uses three-point circular arc interpolation.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 GML supports two different ways to specify the control points of a curve segment.
1. A sequence of "pos" (DirectPositionType) or "pointProperty" (PointPropertyType) elements. "pos" elements are control points that are only part of this curve segment, "pointProperty" elements contain a point that may be referenced from other geometry elements or reference another point defined outside of this curve segment (reuse of existing points).
2. The "posList" element allows for a compact way to specifiy the coordinates of the control points, if all control points are in the same coordinate reference systems and belong to this curve segment only. The number of direct positions in the list must be at least three.
						
						 
							 
							 
							 
								 
									 Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use "pointProperty" instead. Included for backwards compatibility with GML 3.0.0.
								
							
						
						 
						 
							 
								 Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use "posList" instead.
							
						
					
				
				 
					 
						 The attribute "interpolation" specifies the curve interpolation mechanism used for this segment. This mechanism
uses the control points and control parameters to determine the position of this curve segment. For an ArcString the interpolation is fixed as "circularArc3Points".
					
				
				 
					 
						 The number of arcs in the arc string can be explicitly stated in this attribute. The number of control points in the arc string must be 2 * numArc + 1.
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 An Arc is an arc string with only one arc unit, i.e. three control points.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 GML supports two different ways to specify the control points of a curve segment.
1. A sequence of "pos" (DirectPositionType) or "pointProperty" (PointPropertyType) elements. "pos" elements are control points that are only part of this curve segment, "pointProperty" elements contain a point that may be referenced from other geometry elements or reference another point defined outside of this curve segment (reuse of existing points).
2. The "posList" element allows for a compact way to specifiy the coordinates of the control points, if all control points are in the same coordinate reference systems and belong to this curve segment only. The number of direct positions in the list must be three.
						
						 
							 
							 
							 
								 
									 Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use "pointProperty" instead. Included for backwards compatibility with GML 3.0.0.
								
							
						
						 
						 
							 
								 Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use "posList" instead.
							
						
					
				
				 
					 
						 An arc is an arc string consiting of a single arc, the attribute is fixed to "1".
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A Circle is an arc whose ends coincide to form a simple closed loop. The "start" and "end" bearing are equal and shall be the bearing for the first controlPoint listed. The three control points must be distinct non-co-linear points for the Circle to be unambiguously defined. The arc is simply extended past the third control point until the first control point is encountered.
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 This variant of the arc computes the mid points of the arcs instead of storing the coordinates directly. The control point sequence consists of the start and end points of each arc plus the bulge.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 GML supports two different ways to specify the control points of a curve segment.
1. A sequence of "pos" (DirectPositionType) or "pointProperty" (PointPropertyType) elements. "pos" elements are control points that are only part of this curve segment, "pointProperty" elements contain a point that may be referenced from other geometry elements or reference another point defined outside of this curve segment (reuse of existing points).
2. The "posList" element allows for a compact way to specifiy the coordinates of the control points, if all control points are in the same coordinate reference systems and belong to this curve segment only. The number of direct positions in the list must be at least two.
						
						 
							 
							 
							 
								 
									 Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use "pointProperty" instead. Included for backwards compatibility with GML 3.0.0.
								
							
						
						 
						 
							 
								 Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use "posList" instead.
							
						
					
					 
						 
							 The bulge controls the offset of each arc's midpoint. The "bulge" is the real number multiplier for the normal that determines the offset direction of the midpoint of each arc. The length of the bulge sequence is exactly 1 less than the length of the control point array, since a bulge is needed for each pair of adjacent points in the control point array. The bulge is not given by a distance, since it is simply a multiplier for the normal.
The midpoint of the resulting arc is given by: midPoint = ((startPoint + endPoint)/2.0) + bulge*normal
						
					
					 
						 
							 The attribute "normal" is a vector normal (perpendicular) to the chord of the arc, the line joining the first and last
point of the arc. In a 2D coordinate system, there are only two possible directions for the normal, and it is often given as a signed real, indicating its length, with a positive sign indicating a left turn angle from the chord line, and a negative sign indicating a right turn from the chord. In 3D, the normal determines the plane of the arc, along with the start and endPoint of the arc.
The normal is usually a unit vector, but this is not absolutely necessary. If the normal is a zero vector, the geometric object becomes equivalent to the straight line between the two end points. The length of the normal sequence is exactly the same as for the bulge sequence, 1 less than the control point sequence length.
						
					
				
				 
					 
						 The attribute "interpolation" specifies the curve interpolation mechanism used for this segment. This mechanism
uses the control points and control parameters to determine the position of this curve segment. For an ArcStringByBulge the interpolation is fixed as "circularArc2PointWithBulge".
					
				
				 
					 
						 The number of arcs in the arc string can be explicitly stated in this attribute. The number of control points in the arc string must be numArc + 1.
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 An ArcByBulge is an arc string with only one arc unit, i.e. two control points and one bulge.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 GML supports two different ways to specify the control points of a curve segment.
1. A sequence of "pos" (DirectPositionType) or "pointProperty" (PointPropertyType) elements. "pos" elements are control points that are only part of this curve segment, "pointProperty" elements contain a point that may be referenced from other geometry elements or reference another point defined outside of this curve segment (reuse of existing points).
2. The "posList" element allows for a compact way to specifiy the coordinates of the control points, if all control points are in the same coordinate reference systems and belong to this curve segment only. The number of direct positions in the list must be two.
						
						 
							 
							 
							 
								 
									 Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use "pointProperty" instead. Included for backwards compatibility with GML 3.0.0.
								
							
						
						 
						 
							 
								 Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use "posList" instead.
							
						
					
					 
						 
							 The bulge controls the offset of each arc's midpoint. The "bulge" is the real number multiplier for the normal that determines the offset direction of the midpoint of each arc. The length of the bulge sequence is exactly 1 less than the length of the control point array, since a bulge is needed for each pair of adjacent points in the control point array. The bulge is not given by a distance, since it is simply a multiplier for the normal.
The midpoint of the resulting arc is given by: midPoint = ((startPoint + endPoint)/2.0) + bulge*normal
						
					
					 
						 
							 The attribute "normal" is a vector normal (perpendicular) to the chord of the arc, the line joining the first and last
point of the arc. In a 2D coordinate system, there are only two possible directions for the normal, and it is often given as a signed real, indicating its length, with a positive sign indicating a left turn angle from the chord line, and a negative sign indicating a right turn from the chord. In 3D, the normal determines the plane of the arc, along with the start and endPoint of the arc.
The normal is usually a unit vector, but this is not absolutely necessary. If the normal is a zero vector, the geometric object becomes equivalent to the straight line between the two end points. The length of the normal sequence is exactly the same as for the bulge sequence, 1 less than the control point sequence length.
						
					
				
				 
					 
						 An arc is an arc string consiting of a single arc, the attribute is fixed to "1".
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 This variant of the arc requires that the points on the arc have to be computed instead of storing the coordinates directly. The control point is the center point of the arc plus the radius and the bearing at start and end. This represenation can be used only in 2D.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 GML supports two different ways to specify the control points of a curve segment.
1. A "pos" (DirectPositionType) or "pointProperty" (PointPropertyType) element. The "pos" element contains a center point that is only part of this curve segment, a "pointProperty" element contains a point that may be referenced from other geometry elements or reference another point defined outside of this curve segment (reuse of existing points).
2. The "posList" element can be used to specifiy the coordinates of the center point, too. The number of direct positions in the list must be one.
						
						 
							 
							 
							 
								 
									 Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use "pointProperty" instead. Included for backwards compatibility with GML 3.0.0.
								
							
						
						 
						 
							 
								 Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use "posList" instead.
							
						
					
					 
						 
							 The radius of the arc.
						
					
					 
						 
							 The bearing of the arc at the start.
						
					
					 
						 
							 The bearing of the arc at the end.
						
					
				
				 
					 
						 The attribute "interpolation" specifies the curve interpolation mechanism used for this segment. This mechanism
uses the control points and control parameters to determine the position of this curve segment. For an ArcByCenterPoint the interpolation is fixed as "circularArcCenterPointWithRadius".
					
				
				 
					 
						 Since this type describes always a single arc, the attribute is fixed to "1".
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A CircleByCenterPoint is an ArcByCenterPoint with identical start and end angle to form a full circle. Again, this represenation can be used only in 2D.
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 An offset curve is a curve at a constant
		 distance from the basis curve. They can be useful as a cheap
		 and simple alternative to constructing curves that are offsets	
		 by definition.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 offsetBase is a reference to thecurve from which this
							 curve is define	as an offset.
						
					
					 
						 
							 distance is the distance at which the
							 offset curve is generated from the basis curve. In 2D systems, positive distances
							 are to be to the left of the basis curve, and the negative distances are to be to the 
							 right of the basis curve.
						
					
					 
						 
							 refDistance is used to define the vector
       direction of the offset curve from the basis curve. It can
       be omitted in the 2D case, where the distance can be 
       positive or negative. In that case, distance defines left
       side (positive distance) or right side (negative distance)
       with respect to the tangent to the basis curve.

       In 3D the basis curve shall have a well defined tangent 
       direction for every point. The offset curve at any point 
       in 3D, the basis curve shall have a well-defined tangent
       direction for every point. The offset curve at any point
       (parameter) on the basis curve c is in the direction
       -   -   -         -               
       s = v x t  where  v = c.refDirection()  
       and
       -
       t = c.tangent()
                                                    -
       For the offset direction to be well-defined, v shall not
       on any point of the curve be in the same, or opposite, 
       direction as
       - 
       t.

       The default value of the refDirection shall be the local
       co-ordinate axis vector for elevation, which indicates up for
       the curve in a geographic sense.

       NOTE! If the refDirection is the positive tangent to the
       local elevation axis ("points upward"), then the offset
       vector points to the left of the curve when viewed from
       above.
						
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A placement takes a standard geometric
   construction and places it in geographic space. It defines a
   transformation from a constructive parameter space to the 
   co-ordinate space of the co-ordinate reference system being used.  
   Parameter spaces in formulae in this International Standard are 
   given as (u, v) in 2D and(u, v, w) in 3D. Co-ordinate reference 
   systems positions are given in formulae, in this International 
   Standard, by either (x, y) in 2D, or (x, y, z) in 3D.

   Affine placements are defined by linear transformations from 
   parameter space to the target co-ordiante space. 2-dimensional 
   Cartesian parameter space,(u,v) transforms into 3-dimensional co-
   ordinate reference systems,(x,y,z) by using an affine 
   transformation,(u,v)->(x,y,z) which is defined :

	x	ux vx  	x0
			 u	  
	y =	uy vy   + y0
			 v		
	x	uz vz	z0
	
   Then, given this equation, the location element of the 
   AffinePlacement is the direct position (x0, y0, z0), which is the
   target position of the origin in (u, v). The two reference
   directions (ux, uy, uz) and (vx, vy, vz) are the target     
   directions of the unit vectors at the origin in (u, v).
		
		 
			 
				 
					 The location property gives 
     the target of the parameter space origin. This is the vector  
    (x0, y0, z0) in the formulae above.
				
			
			 
				 
					 The attribute refDirection gives the    
target directions for the co-ordinate basis vectors of the  
parameter space. These are the columns of the matrix in the 
formulae given above. The number of directions given shall be 
inDimension. The dimension of the directions shall be 
outDimension.
				
			
			 
				 
					 Dimension of the constructive parameter 
     space.
				
			
			 
				 
					 Dimension of the co-ordinate space.
				
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A clothoid, or Cornu's spiral, is plane
   curve whose curvature is a fixed function of its length.
   In suitably chosen co-ordinates it is given by Fresnel's
   integrals.

    x(t) = 0-integral-t cos(AT*T/2)dT    
    
    y(t) = 0-integral-t sin(AT*T/2)dT
   
   This geometry is mainly used as a transition curve between
   curves of type straight line to circular arc or circular arc
   to circular arc. With this curve type it is possible to 
   achieve a C2-continous transition between the above mentioned
   curve types. One formula for the Clothoid is A*A = R*t where
   A is constant, R is the varying radius of curvature along the
   the curve and t is the length along and given in the Fresnel 
   integrals.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 
								 
									 
										 The "refLocation" is an affine mapping 
          that places  the curve defined by the Fresnel Integrals  
          into the co-ordinate reference system of this object.
									
								
							
						
					
					 
						 
							 The element gives the value for the
       constant in the Fresnel's integrals.
						
					
					 
						 
							 The startParameter is the arc length
       distance from the inflection point that will be the start
       point for this curve segment. This shall be lower limit
       used in the Fresnel integral and is the value of the
       constructive parameter of this curve segment at its start
       point. The startParameter can either be positive or
       negative. 
       NOTE! If 0.0 (zero), lies between the startParameter and
       the endParameter of the clothoid, then the curve goes
       through the clothoid's inflection point, and the direction
       of its radius of curvature, given by the second
       derivative vector, changes sides with respect to the
       tangent vector. The term length distance for the
						
					
					 
						 
							 The endParameter is the arc length
       distance from the inflection point that will be the end
       point for this curve segment. This shall be upper limit
       used in the Fresnel integral and is the value of the
       constructive parameter of this curve segment at its
       start point. The startParameter can either be positive
       or negative.
						
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A GeodesicString consists of sequence of
   geodesic segments. The type essentially combines a sequence of
   Geodesic into a single object.
   The GeodesicString is computed from two or more positions and an
   interpolation using geodesics defined from the geoid (or 
   ellipsoid) of the co-ordinate reference system being used.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
				
				 
					 
						 The attribute "interpolation" specifies the
     curve interpolation mechanism used for this segment. This
     mechanism uses the control points and control parameters to
     determine the position of this curve segment. For an 
     GeodesicString the interpolation is fixed as "geodesic".
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A Geodesic consists of two distinct
   positions joined by a geodesic curve. The control points of
   a Geodesic shall lie on the geodesic between its start
   point and end points. Between these two points, a geodesic
   curve defined from ellipsoid or geoid model used by the
   co-ordinate reference systems may be used to interpolate
   other positions. Any other point in the controlPoint array
   must fall on this geodesic.
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Cubic splines are similar to line strings in that they are a sequence of segments each with its own defining function. A cubic spline uses the control points and a set of derivative parameters to define a piecewise 3rd degree polynomial interpolation. Unlike line-strings, the parameterization by arc length is not necessarily still a polynomial. 
				The function describing the curve must be C2, that is, have a continuous 1st and 2nd derivative at all points, and pass through the controlPoints in the order given. Between the control points, the curve segment is defined by a cubic polynomial. At each control point, the polynomial changes in such a manner that the 1st and 2nd derivative vectors are the same from either side. The control parameters record must contain vectorAtStart, and vectorAtEnd which are the unit tangent vectors at controlPoint[1] and controlPoint[n] where n = controlPoint.count. 
				Note: only the direction of the vectors is relevant, not their length.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 GML supports two different ways to specify the control points of a curve segment.
1. A sequence of "pos" (DirectPositionType) or "pointProperty" (PointPropertyType) elements. "pos" elements are control points that are only part of this curve segment, "pointProperty" elements contain a point that may be referenced from other geometry elements or reference another point defined outside of this curve segment (reuse of existing points).
2. The "posList" element allows for a compact way to specifiy the coordinates of the control points, if all control points are in the same coordinate reference systems and belong to this curve segment only. The number of direct positions in the list must be at least three.
						
						 
							 
							 
							 
								 
									 Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use "pointProperty" instead. Included for backwards compatibility with GML 3.0.0.
								
							
						
						 
						 
							 
								 Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use "posList" instead.
							
						
					
					 
						 
							 "vectorAtStart" is the unit tangent vector at the start point of the spline.
						
					
					 
						 
							 "vectorAtEnd" is the unit tangent vector at the end point of the spline.
						
					
				
				 
					 
						 The attribute "interpolation" specifies the curve interpolation mechanism used for this segment. This mechanism
uses the control points and control parameters to determine the position of this curve segment. For a CubicSpline the interpolation is fixed as "cubicSpline".
					
				
				 
					 
						 The degree for a cubic spline is "3".
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 A knot is a breakpoint on a piecewise spline curve.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 The property "value" is the value of the parameter at the knot of the spline. The sequence of knots shall be a non-decreasing sequence. That is, each knot's value in the sequence shall be equal to or greater than the previous knot's value. The use of equal consecutive knots is normally handled using the multiplicity.
				
			
			 
				 
					 The property "multiplicity" is the multiplicity of this knot used in the definition of the spline (with the same weight).
				
			
			 
				 
					 The property "weight" is the value of the averaging weight used for this knot of the spline.
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Encapsulates a knot to use it in a geometric type.
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A B-Spline is a piecewise parametric polynomial or rational curve described in terms of control points and basis functions. Knots are breakpoints on the curve that connect its pieces. They are given as a non-decreasing sequence of real numbers. If the weights in the knots are equal then it is a polynomial spline. The degree is the algebraic degree of the basis functions.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 GML supports two different ways to specify the control points of a curve segment.
1. A sequence of "pos" (DirectPositionType) or "pointProperty" (PointPropertyType) elements. "pos" elements are control points that are only part of this curve segment, "pointProperty" elements contain a point that may be referenced from other geometry elements or reference another point defined outside of this curve segment (reuse of existing points).
2. The "posList" element allows for a compact way to specifiy the coordinates of the control points, if all control points are in the same coordinate reference systems and belong to this curve segment only.
						
						 
							 
							 
							 
								 
									 Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use "pointProperty" instead. Included for backwards compatibility with GML 3.0.0.
								
							
						
						 
						 
							 
								 Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use "posList" instead.
							
						
					
					 
						 
							 The attribute "degree" shall be the degree of the polynomial used for interpolation in this spline.
						
					
					 
						 
							 The property "knot" shall be the sequence of distinct knots used to define the spline basis functions.
						
					
				
				 
					 
						 The attribute "interpolation" specifies the curve interpolation mechanism used for this segment. This mechanism
uses the control points and control parameters to determine the position of this curve segment. For a BSpline the interpolation can be either "polynomialSpline" or "rationalSpline", default is "polynomialSpline".
					
				
				 
					 
						 The attribute isPolynomial is set to true if this is a polynomial spline.
					
				
				 
					 
						 The attribute "knotType" gives the type of knot distribution used in defining this spline. This is for information only
and is set according to the different construction-functions.
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Bezier curves are polynomial splines that use Bezier or Bernstein polynomials for interpolation purposes. It is a special case of the B-Spline curve with two knots.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 GML supports two different ways to specify the control points of a curve segment.
1. A sequence of "pos" (DirectPositionType) or "pointProperty" (PointPropertyType) elements. "pos" elements are control points that are only part of this curve segment, "pointProperty" elements contain a point that may be referenced from other geometry elements or reference another point defined outside of this curve segment (reuse of existing points).
2. The "posList" element allows for a compact way to specifiy the coordinates of the control points, if all control points are in the same coordinate reference systems and belong to this curve segment only.
						
						 
							 
							 
							 
								 
									 Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use "pointProperty" instead. Included for backwards compatibility with GML 3.0.0.
								
							
						
						 
						 
							 
								 Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use "posList" instead.
							
						
					
					 
						 
							 The attribute "degree" shall be the degree of the polynomial used for interpolation in this spline.
						
					
					 
						 
							 The property "knot" shall be the sequence of distinct knots used to define the spline basis functions.
						
					
				
				 
					 
						 The attribute "interpolation" specifies the curve interpolation mechanism used for this segment. This mechanism
uses the control points and control parameters to determine the position of this curve segment. For a Bezier the interpolation is fixed as "polynomialSpline".
					
				
				 
					 
						 The attribute isPolynomial is set to true as this is a polynomial spline.
					
				
				 
					 
						 The property "knotType" is not relevant for Bezier curve segments.
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A Surface is a 2-dimensional primitive and is composed of one or more surface patches. The surface patches are connected to one another.
				The orientation of the surface is positive ("up"). The orientation of a surface chooses an "up" direction through the choice of the upward normal, which, if the surface is not a cycle, is the side of the surface from which the exterior boundary appears counterclockwise. Reversal of the surface orientation reverses the curve orientation of each boundary component, and interchanges the conceptual "up" and "down" direction of the surface. If the surface is the boundary of a solid, the "up" direction is usually outward. For closed surfaces, which have no boundary, the up direction is that of the surface patches, which must be consistent with one another. Its included surface patches describe the interior structure of the Surface.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 This element encapsulates the patches of the surface.
						
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
					
				
			
			 This property element either references a surface via the XLink-attributes or contains the surface element. A surface element is any element which is substitutable for "_Surface".
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 OrientableSurface consists of a surface and an orientation. If the orientation is "+", then the OrientableSurface is identical to the baseSurface. If the orientation is "-", then the OrientableSurface is a reference to a Surface with an up-normal that reverses the direction for this OrientableSurface, the sense of "the top of the surface".
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 References or contains the base surface (positive orientation).
						
					
				
				 
					 
						 If the orientation is "+", then the OrientableSurface is identical to the baseSurface. If the orientation is "-", then the OrientableSurface is a reference to a Surface with an up-normal that reverses the direction for this OrientableSurface, the sense of "the top of the surface". "+" is the default value.
					
				
			
		
	
	
	
	
	
	 
		 
			 The "_SurfacePatch" element is the abstract head of the substituition group for all surface pach elements describing a continuous portion of a surface.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 A surface patch defines a homogenuous portion of a surface.
		
		 
	
	
	 
		 
			 This property element contains a list of surface patches. The order of the elements is significant and shall be preserved when processing the array.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 A container for an array of surface patches.
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A PolygonPatch is a surface patch that is defined by a set of boundary curves and an underlying surface to which these curves adhere. The curves are coplanar and the polygon uses planar interpolation in its interior. Implements GM_Polygon of ISO 19107.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
				
				 
					 
						 The attribute "interpolation" specifies the interpolation mechanism used for this surface patch. Currently only planar surface patches are defined in GML 3, the attribute is fixed to "planar", i.e. the interpolation method shall return points on a single plane. The boundary of the patch shall be contained within that plane.
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Represents a triangle as a surface with an outer boundary consisting of a linear ring. Note that this is a polygon (subtype) with no inner boundaries. The number of points in the linear ring must be four.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 Constraint: The Ring shall be a LinearRing and must form a triangle, the first and the last position must be co-incident.
						
					
				
				 
					 
						 The attribute "interpolation" specifies the interpolation mechanism used for this surface patch. Currently only planar surface patches are defined in GML 3, the attribute is fixed to "planar", i.e. the interpolation method shall return points on a single plane. The boundary of the patch shall be contained within that plane.
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Represents a rectangle as a surface with an outer boundary consisting of a linear ring. Note that this is a polygon (subtype) with no inner boundaries. The number of points in the linear ring must be five.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 Constraint: The Ring shall be a LinearRing and must form a rectangle; the first and the last position must be co-incident.
						
					
				
				 
					 
						 The attribute "interpolation" specifies the interpolation mechanism used for this surface patch. Currently only planar surface patches are defined in GML 3, the attribute is fixed to "planar", i.e. the interpolation method shall return points on a single plane. The boundary of the patch shall be contained within that plane.
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 This property element either references a curve via the XLink-attributes or contains the curve element. A curve element is any element which is substitutable for "_Curve".
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A Ring is used to represent a single connected component of a surface boundary. It consists of a sequence of curves connected in a cycle (an object whose boundary is empty).
A Ring is structurally similar to a composite curve in that the endPoint of each curve in the sequence is the startPoint of the next curve in the Sequence. Since the sequence is circular, there is no exception to this rule. Each ring, like all boundaries, is a cycle and each ring is simple.
NOTE: Even though each Ring is simple, the boundary need not be simple. The easiest case of this is where one of the interior rings of a surface is tangent to its exterior ring.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 This element references or contains one curve in the composite curve. The curves are contiguous, the collection of curves is ordered.
NOTE: This definition allows for a nested structure, i.e. a CompositeCurve may use, for example, another CompositeCurve as a curve member.
						
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Encapsulates a ring to represent properties in features or geometry collections.
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Reference points which are organised
   into sequences or grids(sequences of equal length sequences).
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 
			
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A gridded surface is a parametric curve
   surface derived from a rectangular grid in the parameter
   space. The rows from this grid are control points for
   horizontal surface curves; the columns are control points
   for vertical surface curves. The working assumption is that
   for a pair of parametric co-ordinates (s, t) that the
   horizontal curves for each integer offset are calculated
   and evaluated at "s". The defines a sequence of control
   points:
   
   cn(s) : s  1 .....columns 

   From this sequence a vertical curve is calculated for "s",
   and evaluated at "t". In most cases, the order of
   calculation (horizontal-vertical vs. vertical-horizontal)
   does not make a difference. Where it does, the horizontal-   
   vertical order shall be the one used.

   Logically, any pair of curve interpolation types can lead
   to a subtype of GriddedSurface. The following clauses
   define some most commonly encountered surfaces that can
   be represented in this manner.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 This is the double indexed sequence
       of control points, given in row major form. 
       NOTE! There in no assumption made about the shape
       of the grid. 
       For example, the positions need not effect a "21/2D"
       surface, consecutive points may be equal in any or all
       of the ordinates. Further, the curves in either or both
       directions may close.
						
					
					 
						 
							 The attribute rows gives the number
         of rows in the parameter grid.
						
					
					 
						 
							 The attribute columns gives the number
        of columns in the parameter grid.
						
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A cone is a gridded surface given as a
   family of conic sections whose control points vary linearly.
   NOTE! A 5-point ellipse with all defining positions identical
   is a point. Thus, a truncated elliptical cone can be given as a
   2x5 set of control points
   ((P1, P1, P1, P1, P1), (P2, P3, P4, P5, P6)). P1 is the apex 
   of the cone. P2, P3,P4, P5 and P6 are any five distinct points
   around the base ellipse of the cone. If the horizontal curves
   are circles as opposed to ellipses, the a circular cone can
   be constructed using ((P1, P1, P1),(P2, P3, P4)). The apex most     
   not coinside with the other plane.
		
		 
			 
				 
				 
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A cylinder is a gridded surface given as a
   family of circles whose positions vary along a set of parallel
   lines, keeping the cross sectional horizontal curves of a
   constant shape.
   NOTE! Given the same working assumptions as in the previous
   note, a Cylinder can be given by two circles, giving us the
   control points of the form ((P1, P2, P3),(P4, P5, P6)).
		
		 
			 
				 
				 
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A sphere is a gridded surface given as a
   family of circles whose positions vary linearly along the
   axis of the sphere, and whise radius varies in proportions to
   the cosine function of the central angle. The horizontal 
   circles resemble lines of constant latitude, and the vertical
   arcs resemble lines of constant longitude. 
   NOTE! If the control points are sorted in terms of increasing
   longitude, and increasing latitude, the upNormal of a sphere
   is the outward normal.
   EXAMPLE If we take a gridded set of latitudes and longitudes
   in degrees,(u,v) such as

	(-90,-180)  (-90,-90)  (-90,0)  (-90,  90) (-90, 180) 
	(-45,-180)  (-45,-90)  (-45,0)  (-45,  90) (-45, 180) 
	(  0,-180)  (  0,-90)  (  0,0)  (  0,  90) (  0, 180)
	( 45,-180)  ( 45,-90)  ( 45,0)  ( 45, -90) ( 45, 180)
	( 90,-180)  ( 90,-90)  ( 90,0)  ( 90, -90) ( 90, 180)
   
   And map these points to 3D using the usual equations (where R
   is the radius of the required sphere).

    z = R sin u
    x = (R cos u)(sin v)
    y = (R cos u)(cos v)

   We have a sphere of Radius R, centred at (0,0), as a gridded
   surface. Notice that the entire first row and the entire last
   row of the control points map to a single point in each 3D
   Euclidean space, North and South poles respectively, and that
   each horizontal curve closes back on itself forming a 
   geometric cycle. This gives us a metrically bounded (of finite
   size), topologically unbounded (not having a boundary, a
   cycle) surface.
		
		 
			 
				 
				 
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A polyhedral surface is a surface composed
   of polygon surfaces connected along their common boundary 
   curves. This differs from the surface type only in the
   restriction on the types of surface patches acceptable.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
						 
							 This property encapsulates the patches of 
      the polyhedral surface.
						
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 This property element contains a list of
   polygon patches. The order of the patches is significant and 
   shall be preserved when processing the list.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 This type defines a container for an array of 
   polygon patches.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 This property element contains a list of
   triangle patches. The order of the patches is significant and 
   shall be preserved when processing the list.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 This type defines a container for an array of 
     triangle patches.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A triangulated surface is a polyhedral 
   surface that is composed only of triangles. There is no
   restriction on how the triangulation is derived.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
						 
							 This property encapsulates the patches of 
      the triangulated surface.
						
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A tin is a triangulated surface that uses
   the Delauny algorithm or a similar algorithm complemented with
   consideration of breaklines, stoplines, and maximum length of 
   triangle sides. These networks satisfy the Delauny's criterion
   away from the modifications: Fore each triangle in the 
   network, the circle passing through its vertices does not
   contain, in its interior, the vertex of any other triangle.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 Stoplines are lines where the local
       continuity or regularity of the surface is questionable.
       In the area of these pathologies, triangles intersecting
       a stopline shall be removed from the tin surface, leaving
       holes in the surface. If coincidence occurs on surface
       boundary triangles, the result shall be a change of the 
       surface boundary. Stoplines contains all these
       pathological segments as a set of line strings.
						
					
					 
						 
							 Breaklines are lines of a critical
       nature to the shape of the surface, representing local
       ridges, or depressions (such as drainage lines) in the
       surface. As such their constituent segments must be
       included in the tin eve if doing so
       violates the Delauny criterion. Break lines contains these
       critical segments as a set of line strings.
						
					
					 
						 
							 Areas of the surface where data is not 
       sufficiently dense to assure reasonable calculation shall be    
       removed by adding a retention criterion for triangles based 
       on the length of their sides. For many triangle sides  
       exceeding maximum length, the adjacent triangles to that 
       triangle side shall be removed from the surface.
						
					
					 
						 
							 The corners of the triangles in the TIN 
  are often referred to as pots. ControlPoint shall contain a 
  set of the GM_Position used as posts for this TIN. Since each  
  TIN contains triangles, there must be at least 3 posts. The 
       order in which these points are given does not affect the 
       surface that is represented. Application schemas may add 
       information based on ordering of control points to facilitate 
       the reconstruction of the TIN from the control points.
						
						 
							 
								 
								 
							
						
					
				
			
		
	
	 
		 
			 
		
	
	
	
	
	
	 
		 
			 The "_Solid" element is the abstract head of the substituition group for all (continuous) solid elements.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 An abstraction of a solid to support the different levels of complexity. A solid is always contiguous.
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
					
				
			
			 This property element either references a solid via the XLink-attributes or contains the solid element. solidProperty is the predefined property which can be used by GML Application Schemas whenever a GML Feature has a property with a value that is substitutable for _Solid.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 A property that has a solid as its value domain can either be an appropriate geometry element encapsulated in an element of this type or an XLink reference to a remote geometry element (where remote includes geometry elements located elsewhere in the same document). Either the reference or the contained element must be given, but neither both nor none.
		
		 
			 
		
		 
			 
				 This attribute group includes the XLink attributes (see xlinks.xsd). XLink is used in GML to reference remote resources (including those elsewhere in the same document). A simple link element can be constructed by including a specific set of XLink attributes. The XML Linking Language (XLink) is currently a Proposed Recommendation of the World Wide Web Consortium. XLink allows elements to be inserted into XML documents so as to create sophisticated links between resources; such links can be used to reference remote properties.
A simple link element can be used to implement pointer functionality, and this functionality has been built into various GML 3 elements by including the gml:AssociationAttributeGroup.
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A container for an array of solids. The elements are always contained in the array property, referencing geometry elements or arrays of geometry elements is not supported.
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A solid is the basis for 3-dimensional geometry. The extent of a solid is defined by the boundary surfaces (shells). A shell is represented by a composite surface, where every  shell is used to represent a single connected component of the boundary of a solid. It consists of a composite surface (a list of orientable surfaces) connected in a topological cycle (an object whose boundary is empty). Unlike a Ring, a Shell's elements have no natural sort order. Like Rings, Shells are simple.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 
								 
									 
										 
									
								
							
							 Boundaries of solids are similar to surface boundaries. In normal 3-dimensional Euclidean space, one (composite) surface is distinguished as the exterior. In the more general case, this is not always possible.
						
					
					 
						 
							 
								 
									 
										 
									
								
							
							 Boundaries of solids are similar to surface boundaries.
						
					
				
			
		
	
	
	
	
	 
		 
			 CurveInterpolationType is a list of codes that may be used to identify the interpolation mechanisms specified by an
application schema.
		
		 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 SurfaceInterpolationType is a list of codes that may be used to identify the interpolation mechanisms specified by an
application schema.
		
		 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Defines allowed values for the knots` type. Uniform knots implies that all knots are of multiplicity 1 and they differ by a positive constant from the preceding knot. Knots are quasi-uniform iff they are of multiplicity (degree + 1) at the ends, of multiplicity 1 elsewhere, and they differ by a positive constant from the preceding knot.
		
		 
			 
			 
			 
		
	
	




GML-3.1.1/base/observation.xsd
 
	 
		 observation.xsd
		 Observation schema for GML 3.1     
    Copyright (c) 2002-2005 OGC, All Rights Reserved.
	For conditions, see OGC Software Notice http://www.opengeospatial.org/about/?page=ipr
	
	
	
	 
	 
	 
	
	
	 
		 
			 This element contains or points to a description of a sensor, instrument or procedure used for the observation
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 This element contains or points to the specimen, region or station which is the object of the observation
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Synonym for target - common word used for photographs
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Container for an object representing the target or subject of an observation.
		
		 
			 
				 
				 
			
		
		 
	
	
	 
		 
			 The result of the observation: an image, external object, etc
		
	
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
					 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 
				 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 
				 
					 
				
			
		
	
	




GML-3.1.1/base/grids.xsd
 
	 
		 grids.xsd
		 Grid geometries
    A subset of implicit geometries
    Designed for use with GML Coverage schema, but maybe useful elsewhere as well.  
    
    Copyright (c) 2002-2005 OGC, All Rights Reserved.
	For conditions, see OGC Software Notice http://www.opengeospatial.org/about/?page=ipr
	
	
	 
	
	 
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 An unrectified grid, which is a network composed of two or more sets of equally spaced parallel lines in which the members of each set intersect the members of the other sets at right angles.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
				
				 
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Provides grid coordinate values for the diametrically opposed corners of an envelope that bounds a section of grid. The value of a single coordinate is the number of offsets from the origin of the grid in the direction of a specific axis.
		
		 
			 
			 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Should be substitutionGroup="gml:Grid" but changed in order to accomplish Xerces-J schema validation
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 A rectified grid has an origin and vectors that define its post locations.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
				
			
		
	
	




GML-3.1.1/base/measures.xsd
 
	 
		 
		 Extends the units.xsd and basicTypes.xsd schemas with types for recording measures using specific types of units, especially the measures and units needed for coordinate reference systems and coordinate operations. The specific unit types encoded are length, angle, scale factor, time, area, volume, speed, and grid length. This schema allows angle values to be recorded as single numbers or in degree-minute-second format. 
		Copyright (c) 2002-2005 OGC, All Rights Reserved. For conditions, see OGC Software Notice http://www.opengeospatial.org/about/?page=ipr
		Parts of this schema are based on Subclause 6.5.7 of ISO/CD 19103 Geographic information - Conceptual schema language, on Subclause A.5.2.2.3 of ISO/CD 19118 Geographic information - Encoding, and on Subclause 4.7 of OpenGIS Recommendation Paper OGC 02-007r4 Units of Measure Use and Definition Recommendations.
	
	
	 
	
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Value of a length (or distance) quantity, with its units. Uses the MeasureType with the restriction that the unit of measure referenced by uom must be suitable for a length, such as metres or feet.
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Value of a scale factor (or ratio) that has no physical unit. Uses the MeasureType with the restriction that the unit of measure referenced by uom must be suitable for a scale factor, such as percent, permil, or parts-per-million.
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Value of a time or temporal quantity, with its units. Uses the MeasureType with the restriction that the unit of measure referenced by uom must be suitable for a time value, such as seconds or weeks.
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Value of a length (or distance) quantity in a grid, where the grid spacing does not have any associated physical units, or does not have a constant physical spacing. This grid length will often be used in a digital image grid, where the base units are likely to be pixel spacings. Uses the MeasureType with the restriction that the unit of measure referenced by uom must be suitable for length along the axes of a grid, such as pixel spacings or grid spacings.
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Value of a spatial area quantity, with its units. Uses the MeasureType with the restriction that the unit of measure referenced by uom must be suitable for an area, such as square metres or square miles.
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Value of a spatial volume quantity, with its units. Uses the MeasureType with the restriction that the unit of measure referenced by uom must be suitable for a volume, such as cubic metres or cubic feet.
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Value of a speed, with its units. Uses the MeasureType with the restriction that the unit of measure referenced by uom must be suitable for a velocity, such as metres per second or miles per hour.
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Value of an angle quantity provided in either degree-minute-second format or single value format.
		
		 
			 
			 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Value of an angle quantity recorded as a single number, with its units. Uses the MeasureType with the restriction that the unit of measure referenced by uom must be suitable for an angle, such as degrees or radians.
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Angle value provided in degree-minute-second or degree-minute format.
		
		 
			 
			 
				 
				 
					 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Integer number of degrees, plus the angle direction. This element can be used for geographic Latitude and Longitude. For Latitude, the XML attribute direction can take the values "N" or "S", meaning North or South of the equator. For Longitude, direction can take the values "E" or "W", meaning East or West of the prime meridian. This element can also be used for other angles. In that case, the direction can take the values "+" or "-" (of SignType), in the specified rotational direction from a specified reference direction.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 
								 
									 
									 
									 
									 
								
							
							 
								 
							
						
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Integer number of degrees in a degree-minute-second or degree-minute angular value, without indication of direction.
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Decimal number of arc-minutes in a degree-minute angular value.
		
		 
			 
			 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Integer number of arc-minutes in a degree-minute-second angular value.
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Number of arc-seconds in a degree-minute-second angular value.
		
		 
			 
			 
		
	
	




GML-3.1.1/base/temporalReferenceSystems.xsd
 
	 
		 
		 The Temporal Reference Systems schema for GML 3.1 provides constructs for handling various styles of temporal reference system. 
    This schema reflects a partial implementation of the model described in ISO 19108:2002. 
    Copyright (c) 2002-2005 OGC, All Rights Reserved.
	For conditions, see OGC Software Notice http://www.opengeospatial.org/about/?page=ipr
	
	
	 
	 
	
	
	
	 
		 
			 Abstract element serves primarily as the head of a substitution group for temporal reference systems.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 A value in the time domain is measured relative to a temporal reference system. Common 
        types of reference systems include calendars, ordinal temporal reference systems, and 
        temporal coordinate systems (time elapsed since some epoch, e.g. UNIX time).
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A temporal coordinate system is based on a continuous interval scale defined in terms of a single time interval.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
						 
					
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 In an ordinal reference system the order of events in time can be well 
      established, but the magnitude of the intervals between them can not be 
      accurately determined (e.g. a stratigraphic sequence).
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Ordinal temporal reference systems are often hierarchically structured 
      such that an ordinal era at a given level of the hierarchy includes a 
      sequence of shorter, coterminous ordinal eras. This captured using the member/group properties.  
      
      Note that in this schema, TIme Ordinal Era is patterned on TimeEdge, which is a variation from ISO 19108.  
      This is in order to fulfill the requirements of ordinal reference systems based on eras delimited by 
      named points or nodes, which are common in geology, archeology, etc.  
      
      This change is subject of a change proposal to ISO
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
					 
					 
					 
						 
							 An Era may be composed of several member Eras. The "member" element implements the association to the Era at the next level down the hierarchy.  "member" follows the standard GML property pattern whereby its (complex) value may be either described fully inline, or may be the target of a link carried on the member element and described fully elsewhere, either in the same document or from another service.
						
					
					 
						 
							 In a particular Time System, an Era may be a member of a group.  The "group" element implements the back-pointer to the Era at the next level up in the hierarchy. 

If the hierarchy is represented by describing the nested components fully in the their nested position inside "member" elements, then the parent can be easily inferred, so the group property is unnecessary.  

However, if the hierarchy is represented by links carried on the "member" property elements, pointing to Eras described fully elsewhere, then it may be useful for a child (member) era to carry an explicit pointer back to its parent (group) Era.
						
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A calendar is a discrete temporal reference system 
      that provides a basis for defining temporal position to a resolution of one day. 
      A single calendar may reference more than one calendar era.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 Link to the CalendarEras that it uses as a reference for dating.
						
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 In every calendar, years are numbered relative to the date of a 
      reference event that defines a calendar era. 
      In this implementation, we omit the back-pointer "datingSystem".
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 Name or description of a mythical or historic event which fixes the position of the base scale of the calendar era.
						
					
					 
						 
							 Date of the referenceEvent expressed as a date in the given calendar. 
              In most calendars, this date is the origin (i.e., the first day) of the scale, but this is not always true.
						
					
					 
						 
							 Julian date that corresponds to the reference date.  
              The Julian day numbering system is a temporal coordinate system that has an 
              origin earlier than any known calendar, 
              at noon on 1 January 4713 BC in the Julian proleptic calendar.  
              The Julian day number is an integer value; 
              the Julian date is a decimal value that allows greater resolution. 
              Transforming calendar dates to and from Julian dates provides a 
              relatively simple basis for transforming dates from one calendar to another.
						
					
					 
						 
							 Period for which the calendar era was used as a basis for dating.
						
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 A clock provides a basis for defining temporal position within a day. 
      A clock must be used with a calendar in order to provide a complete description of a temporal position 
      within a specific day.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 Name or description of an event, such as solar noon or sunrise, 
              which fixes the position of the base scale of the clock.
						
					
					 
						 
							 time of day associated with the reference event expressed as 
              a time of day in the given clock. The reference time is usually the origin of the clock scale.
						
					
					 
						 
							 24 hour local or UTC time that corresponds to the reference time.
						
					
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	




GML-3.1.1/base/referenceSystems.xsd
 
	 
		 
		 How to encode reference system definitions. Builds on several other parts of GML 3 to encode the data needed to define reference systems. 
		Copyright (c) 2002-2005 OGC, All Rights Reserved. For conditions, see OGC Software Notice http://www.opengeospatial.org/about/?page=ipr
		This schema encodes the Reference System (RS_) package of the extended UML Model for OGC Abstract Specification Topic 2: Spatial Referencing by Coordinates. That UML model is adapted from ISO 19111 - Spatial referencing by coordinates, as described in Annex C of Topic 2. The SC_CRS class is also encoded here, to eliminate the (circular) references from coordinateOperations.xsd to coordinateReferenceSystems.xsd. The RS_SpatialReferenceSystemUsingGeographicIdentifier class is not encoded, since it is not applicable to coordinate positions. The CI_Citation class is not directly encoded, since such information can be included as metaDataProperty elements which are optionally allowed. A modified version of the EX_Extent (DataType) class from ISO 19115 is currently encoded here, using GML 3 schema types. (A more extensive version of the EX_Extent package might be XML encoded in the future, probably in a separate extent.xsd schema.)
		Caution: The CRS package in GML 3.1 and GML 3.1.1 is preliminary, and is expected to undergo some modifications that are not backward compatible during the development of GML 3.2 (ISO 19136). The GML 3.2 package will implement the model described in the revised version of ISO 19111.
	
	
	 
	 
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Basic encoding for reference system objects, simplifying and restricting the DefinitionType as needed.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
				
				 
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 The name by which this reference system is identified.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Description of a spatial and/or temporal reference system used by a dataset.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 Set of alterative identifications of this reference system. The first srsID, if any, is normally the primary identification code, and any others are aliases.
						
					
					 
						 
							 Comments on or information about this reference system, including source information.
						
					
					 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 An identification of a reference system.
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Association to a reference system, either referencing or containing the definition of that reference system.
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	 
		 
			 Abstract coordinate reference system, usually defined by a coordinate system and a datum. This abstract complexType shall not be used, extended, or restricted, in an Application Schema, to define a concrete subtype with a meaning equivalent to a concrete subtype specified in this document.
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Association to a CRS abstract coordinate reference system, either referencing or containing the definition of that CRS.
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	
	 
		 
			 An identification of a CRS object. The first use of the IdentifierType for an object, if any, is normally the primary identification code, and any others are aliases.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 The code or name for this Identifier, often from a controlled list or pattern defined by a code space. The optional codeSpace attribute is normally included to identify or reference a code space within which one or more codes are defined. This code space is often defined by some authority organization, where one organization may define multiple code spaces. The range and format of each Code Space identifier is defined by that code space authority. Information about that code space authority can be included as metaDataProperty elements which are optionally allowed in all CRS objects.
				
			
			 
			 
				 
					 Remarks about this code or alias.
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Identifier of the version of the associated codeSpace or code, as specified by the codeSpace or code authority. This version is included only when the "code" or "codeSpace" uses versions. When appropriate, the version is identified by the effective date, coded using ISO 8601 date format.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Information about this object or code. Contains text or refers to external text.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Description of domain of usage, or limitations of usage, for which this CRS object is valid.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Area or region in which this CRS object is valid.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Information about the spatial, vertical, and/or temporal extent of a reference system object. Constraints: At least one of the elements "description", "boundingBox", "boundingPolygon", "verticalExtent", and temporalExtent" must be included, but more that one can be included when appropriate. Furthermore, more than one "boundingBox", "boundingPolygon", "verticalExtent", and/or temporalExtent" element can be included, with more than one meaning the union of the individual domains.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 Description of spatial and/or temporal extent of this object.
				
			
			 
				 
					 Geographic domain of this reference system object.
				
				 
					 
						 Unordered list of bounding boxes (or envelopes) whose union describes the spatial domain of this object.
					
				
				 
					 
						 Unordered list of bounding polygons whose union describes the spatial domain of this object.
					
				
			
			 
				 
					 Unordered list of vertical intervals whose union describes the spatial domain of this object.
				
			
			 
				 
					 Unordered list of time periods whose union describes the spatial domain of this object.
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 A bounding box (or envelope) defining the spatial domain of this object.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 A bounding polygon defining the horizontal spatial domain of this object.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 An interval defining the vertical spatial domain of this object.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 A time period defining the temporal domain of this object.
		
	
	




GML-3.1.1/base/temporal.xsd
 
	 
		 
		 The temporal schema for GML 3.1 provides constructs for handling time-varying spatial data. 
    This schema reflects a partial implementation of the model described in ISO 19108:2002. 
    Copyright (c) 2002-2005 OGC, All Rights Reserved.
	For conditions, see OGC Software Notice http://www.opengeospatial.org/about/?page=ipr
	
	
	 
	
	
	
	 
		 
			 This abstract element acts as the head of the substitution group for temporal primitives and complexes.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 The abstract supertype for temporal objects.
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	
	
	 
		 
			 This abstract element acts as the head of the substitution group for temporal primitives.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 The abstract supertype for temporal primitives.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	 
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 
							 
							 
							 
							 
							 
							 
							 
							 
							 
							 
							 
							 
						
					
				
			
		
	
	
	
	
	 
		 
			 This abstract element acts as the head of the substitution group for temporal complexes. 
			Temporal complex is an aggregation of temporal primitives as its components, 
			represents a temporal geometric complex and a temporal topology complex. 
			N.B. Temporal geometric complex is not defined in this schema.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 The abstract supertype for temporal complexes.
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	
	
	 
		 
			 This abstract element acts as the head of the substitution group for temporal geometric primitives.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 The abstract supertype for temporal geometric primitives.
       A temporal geometry must be associated with a temporal reference system via URI. 
       The Gregorian calendar with UTC is the default reference system, following ISO 
       8601. Other reference systems in common use include the GPS calendar and the 
       Julian calendar.
		
		 
			 
				 
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Omit back-pointers begunBy, endedBy.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
						 
					
					 
						 
						 
					
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	
	
	 
		 
			 This model group is provided as an alternative to the abstract susbstitutionGroup head _timeLength.
		ISO 19136 comment 411
		
		 
			 
			 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 This element is an instance of the primitive xsd:duration simple type to 
      enable use of the ISO 8601 syntax for temporal length (e.g. P5DT4H30M). 
      It is a valid subtype of TimeDurationType according to section 3.14.6, 
      rule 2.2.4 in XML Schema, Part 1.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 This element is a valid subtype of TimeDurationType 
			according to section 3.14.6, rule 2.2.4 in XML Schema, Part 1.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 This type extends the built-in xsd:decimal simple type to allow floating-point 
      values for temporal length. According to  the ISO 11404 model you have to use 
      positiveInteger together with appropriate values for radix and factor. The 
      resolution of the time interval is to one radix ^(-factor) of the specified 
      time unit (e.g. unit="second", radix="10", factor="3" specifies a resolution 
      of milliseconds). It is a subtype of TimeDurationType.
		
		 
			 
				 
				 
				 
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Standard units for measuring time intervals (see ISO 31-1).
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
					 
					 
					 
				
			
			 
				 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	
	
	 
		 
			 Direct representation of a temporal position
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Direct representation of a temporal position. 
      Indeterminate time values are also allowed, as described in ISO 19108. The indeterminatePosition 
      attribute can be used alone or it can qualify a specific value for temporal position (e.g. before 
      2002-12, after 1019624400). 
      For time values that identify position within a calendar, the calendarEraName attribute provides 
      the name of the calendar era to which the date is referenced (e.g. the Meiji era of the Japanese calendar).
		
		 
			 
				 
				 
				 
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 The ISO 19108:2002 hierarchy of subtypes for temporal position are collapsed 
      by defining a union of XML Schema simple types for indicating temporal position relative 
      to a specific reference system. 
      
      Dates and dateTime may be indicated with varying degrees of precision.  
      dateTime by itself does not allow right-truncation, except for fractions of seconds. 
      When used with non-Gregorian calendars based on years, months, days, 
      the same lexical representation should still be used, with leading zeros added if the 
      year value would otherwise have fewer than four digits.  
      
      An ordinal position may be referenced via URI identifying the definition of an ordinal era.  
      
      A time coordinate value is indicated as a decimal (e.g. UNIX time, GPS calendar).
		
		 
	
	
	 
		 
			 Calendar dates may be indicated with varying degrees of precision, 
      using year, year-month, date. 
      When used with non-Gregorian calendars based on years, months, days, 
      the same lexical representation should still be used, with leading zeros added if the 
      year value would otherwise have fewer than four digits.  
      time is used for a position that recurs daily (see clause 5.4.4.2 of ISO 19108:2002).
		
		 
	
	
	 
		 
			 This enumerated data type specifies values for indeterminate positions.
		
		 
			 
			 
			 
			 
		
	
	
	
	
	 
	




GML-3.1.1/base/temporalTopology.xsd
 
	 
		 
		 The temporal topology schema for ISO19136 provides constructs for handling topological complexes and 
		temporal feature relationships. 
		Temporal geometric characteristics of features are represented as instants and periods. 
		While, temporal context of features that does not relate to the position of time is described as connectivity relationships 
		among instants and periods. These relationships are called temporal topology as they do not change in time, 
		as long as the direction of time does not change. 
		It is used effectively in the case of describing a family tree expressing evolution of species, an ecological cycle, 
		a lineage of lands or buildings, or a history of separation and merger of administrative boundaries.
		This schema reflects a partial yet consistent implementation of the model described in ISO 19108:2002. 
    Copyright (c) 2002-2005 OGC, All Rights Reserved.
	For conditions, see OGC Software Notice http://www.opengeospatial.org/about/?page=ipr
	
	
	 
	
	
	
	
	 
		 
			 This element represents temporal topology complex. It shall be the connected acyclic directed graph composed of time nodes and time edges.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 A temporal topology complex.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 A time topology complex property can either be any time topology complex element
			 encapsulated in an element of this type or an XLink reference to a remote time topology complex element 
			 (where remote includes elements located elsewhere in the same document). 
			 Note that either the reference or the contained element must be given, but not both or none.
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	
	
	 
		 
			 This abstract element acts as the head of the substitution group for temporal topology primitives.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 The element "complex" carries a reference to the complex containing this primitive.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 A time topology primitive property can either hold any time topology complex element
			 eor carry an XLink reference to a remote time topology complex element 
			 (where remote includes elements located elsewhere in the same document). 
			 Note that either the reference or the contained element must be given, but not both or none.
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	
	
	 
		 
			 "TimeNode" is a zero dimensional temporal topology primitive, 
			expresses a position in topological time, and is a start and an end of time edge, which represents states of time.
			Time node may be isolated. However, it cannot describe the ordering relationships with other primitives. 
			An isolated node may not be an element of any temporal topology complex.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Type declaration of the element "TimeNode".
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 A time node property can either be any time node element encapsulated in an element of this type 
			or an XLink reference to a remote time node element (where remote includes elements located elsewhere in the same document). 
			Note that either the reference or the contained element must be given, but not both or none.
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	
	
	 
		 
			 TimeEdge is one dimensional temporal topology primitive,
			 expresses a state in topological time. It has an orientation from its start toward the end, 
			 and its boundaries shall associate with two different time nodes.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Type declaration of the element "TimeEdge".
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 A time edge property can either be any time edge element encapsulated in an element of this type 
			or an XLink reference to a remote time edge element (where remote includes elements located elsewhere in the same document). 
			Note that either the reference or the contained element must be given, but not both or none.
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	
	
	 
		 
			 Feature succession is a semantic relationship derived from evaluation of observer, and 
			Feature Substitution, Feature Division and Feature Fusion are defined as associations between 
			previous features and next features in the temporal context. 
			Successions shall be represented in either following two ways. 
			* define a temporal topological complex element as a feature element 
			* define an association same as temporal topological complex between features.
		
		 
			 
			 
			 
			 
		
	
	




GML-3.1.1/base/topology.xsd
 
	 
		 topology.xsd
		 
	Copyright (c) 2002-2005 OGC, All Rights Reserved.
	For conditions, see OGC Software Notice http://www.opengeospatial.org/about/?page=ipr
		
	
	 
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Substitution group branch for Topo Primitives, used by TopoPrimitiveArrayAssociationType
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	 
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
				 
				 
			
		
		 
	
	
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Its optional co-boundary is a set of connected directedEdges.  The orientation of one of these dirEdges is "+" if the Node is the "to" node of the Edge, and "-" if it is the "from" node.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
		
		 
		 
	
	
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 There is precisely one positively directed and one negatively directed node in the boundary of every edge. The negatively and positively directed nodes correspond to the start and end nodes respectively. The optional coboundary of an edge is a circular sequence of directed faces which are incident on this edge in document order. Faces which use a particular boundary edge in its positive orientation appear with positive orientation on the coboundary of the same edge. In the 2D case, the orientation of the face on the left of the edge is "+"; the orientation of the face on the right on its right is "-". An edge may optionally be realised by a 1-dimensional (curve) geometric primitive.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
		
		 
		 
	
	
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 . The topological boundary of a face consists of a set of directed edges. Note that all edges associated with a Face, including dangling and interior edges, appear in the boundary.  Dangling and interior edges are each referenced by pairs of directedEdges with opposing orientations.  The optional coboundary of a face is a pair of directed solids which are bounded by this face. If present, there is precisely one positively directed and one negatively directed solid in the coboundary of every face. The positively directed solid corresponds to the solid which lies in the direction of the positively directed normal to the face in any geometric realisation.  A face may optionally be realised by a 2-dimensional (surface) geometric primitive.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
		
		 
		 
	
	
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 The topological boundary of a TopoSolid consists of a set of directed faces. Note that all faces associated with the TopoSolid, including dangling faces, appear in the boundary. The coboundary of a TopoSolid is empty and hence requires no representation.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	
	 
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
		
		 
		 
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 The intended use of TopoPoint is to appear within a point feature to express the structural and possibly geometric relationships of this point to other features via shared node definitions. Note the orientation assigned to the directedNode has no meaning in this context. It is preserved for symmetry with the types and elements which follow.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 
		
	
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 The end Node of each directedEdge of a TopoCurveType
is the start Node of the next directedEdge of the TopoCurveType in document order.  The TopoCurve type and element represent a homogeneous topological expression, a list of directed edges, which if realised are isomorphic to a geometric curve primitive. The intended use of TopoCurve is to appear within a line feature instance to express the structural and geometric relationships of this line to other features via the shared edge definitions.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 
		
	
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 The TopoSurface type and element represent a homogeneous topological expression, a set of directed faces, which if realised are isomorphic to a geometric surface primitive. The intended use of TopoSurface is to appear within a surface feature instance to express the structural and possibly geometric relationships of this surface to other features via the shared face definitions.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 The TopoVolume type and element represent a homogeneous topological expression, a set of directed TopoSolids, which if realised are isomorphic to a geometric solid primitive. The intended use of TopoVolume is to appear within a 3D solid feature instance to express the structural and geometric relationships of this solid to other features via the shared TopoSolid definitions.  . Note the orientation assigned to the directedSolid has no meaning in three dimensions. It is preserved for symmetry with the preceding types and elements.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 
		
	
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 This type represents a TP_Complex capable of holding topological primitives.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
					 
					 
					 
				
				 
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
					
				
			
			 Need schamatron test here that isMaximal attribute value is true
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 This Property can be used to embed a TopoComplex in a feature collection.
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	
	 
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 This type supports embedding topological primitives in a TopoComplex.
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	
	 
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 This type supports embedding an array of topological primitives in a TopoComplex
		
		
		 
			 
				 
			
		
		
	
	




GML-3.1.1/base/units.xsd
 
	 
		 
		 Builds on gmlBase.xsd to encode units of measure (or uom), including definitions of units of measure and dictionaries of such definitions. GML 3.0 candidate schema, primary editor: Arliss Whiteside. Last updated 2005-06-22.
	Copyright (c) 2002-2005 OGC, All Rights Reserved.
	For conditions, see OGC Software Notice http://www.opengeospatial.org/about/?page=ipr
	Parts of this schema are based on Subclause 6.5.7 of ISO/CD 19103 Geographic information - Conceptual schema language, on Subclause A.5.2.2.3 of ISO/CD 19118 Geographic information - Encoding, and on most of OpenGIS Recommendation Paper OGC 02-007r4 Units of Measure Use and Definition Recommendations.
	
	
	 
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Reference to a unit of measure definition that applies to all the numerical values described by the element containing this element. Notice that a complexType which needs to include the uom attribute can do so by extending this complexType. Alternately, this complexType can be used as a pattern for a new complexType.
		
		 
		 
			 
				 Reference to a unit of measure definition, usually within the same XML document but possibly outside the XML document which contains this reference. For a reference within the same XML document, the "#" symbol should be used, followed by a text abbreviation of the unit name. However, the "#" symbol may be optional, and still may be interpreted as a reference.
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Definition of a unit of measure (or uom). The definition includes a quantityType property, which indicates the phenomenon to which the units apply, and a catalogSymbol, which gives the short symbol used for this unit. This element is used when the relationship of this unit to other units or units systems is unknown.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Definition of a unit of measure which is a base unit from the system of units.  A base unit cannot be derived by combination of other base units within this system.  Sometimes known as "fundamental unit".
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Definition of a unit of measure which is defined through algebraic combination of more primitive units, which are usually base units from a particular system of units. Derived units based directly on base units are usually preferred for quantities other than the base units or fundamental quantities within a system.  If a derived unit is not the preferred unit, the ConventionalUnit element should be used instead.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Definition of a unit of measure which is related to a preferred unit for this quantity type through a conversion formula.  A method for deriving this unit by algebraic combination of more primitive units, may also be provided.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
						 
					
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Informal description of the phenomenon or type of quantity that is measured or observed. For example, "length", "angle", "time", "pressure", or "temperature". When the quantity is the result of an observation or measurement, this term is known as Observable Type or Measurand.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 For global understanding of a unit of measure, it is often possible to reference an item in a catalog of units, using a symbol in that catalog. The "codeSpace" attribute in "CodeType" identifies a namespace for the catalog symbol value, and might reference the catalog. The "string" value in "CodeType" contains the value of a symbol that is unique within this catalog namespace. This symbol often appears explicitly in the catalog, but it could be a combination of symbols using a specified algebra of units. For example, the symbol "cm" might indicate that it is the "m" symbol combined with the "c" prefix.
		
	
	
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Definition of one unit term for a derived unit of measure. This unit term references another unit of measure (uom) and provides an integer exponent applied to that unit in defining the compound unit. The exponent can be positive or negative, but not zero.
		
		 
			 
				 
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 This element is included when this unit has an accurate conversion to the preferred unit for this quantity type.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 This element is included when the correct definition of this unit is unknown, but this unit has a rough or inaccurate conversion to the preferred unit for this quantity type.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Relation of a unit to the preferred unit for this quantity type, specified by an arithmetic conversion (scaling and/or offset). A preferred unit is either a base unit or a derived unit selected for all units of one quantity type. The mandatory attribute "uom" shall reference the preferred unit that this conversion applies to. The conversion is specified by one of two alternative elements: "factor" or "formula".
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 
							 Specification of the scale factor by which a value using this unit of measure can be multiplied to obtain the corresponding value using the preferred unit of measure.
						
					
					 
						 
							 Specification of the formula by which a value using this unit of measure can be converted to obtain the corresponding value using the preferred unit of measure.
						
					
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Paremeters of a simple formula by which a value using this unit of measure can be converted to the corresponding value using the preferred unit of measure. The formula element contains elements a, b, c and d, whose values use the XML Schema type "double". These values are used in the formula y = (a + bx) / (c + dx), where x is a value using this unit, and y is the corresponding value using the preferred unit. The elements a and d are optional, and if values are not provided, those parameters are considered to be zero. If values are not provided for both a and d, the formula is equivalent to a fraction with numerator and denominator parameters.
		
		 
			 
			 
			 
			 
		
	
	




GML-3.1.1/base/valueObjects.xsd
 
	 
		 valueObjects.xsd
		 GML conformant schema for Values in which the  
		    * scalar Value types and lists have their values recorded in simpleContent elements 
		    * complex Value types are built recursively
    Copyright (c) 2002-2005 OGC, All Rights Reserved.
	For conditions, see OGC Software Notice http://www.opengeospatial.org/about/?page=ipr
	
	
	
	 
	 
	
	 
		 
			 Utility choice group which unifies generic Values defined in this schema document with 
			Geometry and Temporal objects and the Measures described above, 
			so that any of these may be used within aggregate Values.
		
		 
			
			 
			 
			
			 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
			 
			 
			 
		
	
	
	
	
	 
		 
			 
			 
			 
			 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
			 
			 
			 
		
	
	
	
	 
		 
			 A value from two-valued logic, using the XML Schema boolean type.  An instance may take the values {true, false, 1, 0}.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 XML List based on XML Schema boolean type.  An element of this type contains a space-separated list of boolean values {0,1,true,false}
		
	
	
	
	 
		 
			 A term representing a classification.  It has an optional XML attribute codeSpace, whose value is a URI which identifies a dictionary, codelist or authority for the term.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 A space-separated list of terms or nulls.  A single XML attribute codeSpace may be provided, which authorises all the terms in the list.
		
	
	
	
	 
		 
			 A numeric value with a scale.  The content of the element is an amount using the XML Schema type double which permits decimal or scientific notation.  An XML attribute uom (unit of measure) is required, whose value is a URI which identifies the definition of the scale or units by which the numeric value must be multiplied.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 A space separated list of amounts or nulls.  The amounts use the XML Schema type double.  A single XML attribute uom (unit of measure) is required, whose value is a URI which identifies the definition of the scale or units by which all the amounts in the list must be multiplied.
		
	
	
	
	 
		 
			 An integer representing a frequency of occurrence.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 A space-separated list of integers or nulls.
		
	
	
	
	
	
	 
		 
			 Aggregate value built from other Values using the Composite pattern. It contains zero or an arbitrary number of valueComponent elements, and zero or one valueComponents elements.  It may be used for strongly coupled aggregates (vectors, tensors) or for arbitrary collections of values.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
				
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Aggregate value built using the Composite pattern.
		
	
	
	
	 
		 
			 A Value Array is used for homogeneous arrays of primitive and aggregate values.  The member values may be scalars, composites, arrays or lists.  ValueArray has the same content model as CompositeValue, but the member values must be homogeneous.  The element declaration contains a Schematron constraint which expresses this restriction precisely.            Since the members are homogeneous, the referenceSystem (uom, codeSpace) may be specified on the ValueArray itself and implicitly inherited by all the members if desired.    Note that a_ScalarValueList is preferred for arrays of Scalar Values since this is a more efficient encoding.
		
		 
			 
				 
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 
				 
					 
						 ValueArray may not carry both a reference to a codeSpace and a uom
					
				
				 
					 
						 All components of   must be of the same type
						 All components of   must be of the same type
					
				
			
			 A Value Array is used for homogeneous arrays of primitive and aggregate values.   _ScalarValueList is preferred for arrays of Scalar Values since this is more efficient.  Since "choice" is not available for attribute groups, an external constraint (e.g. Schematron) would be required to enforce the selection of only one of these through schema validation
		
	
	
	 
		 
		 
	
	
	
	 
		 
			 
			 
			 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Utility element to store a 2-point range of numeric values. If one member is a null, then this is a single ended interval.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Restriction of list type to store a 2-point range of numeric values. If one member is a null, then this is a single ended interval.
		
		 
			 
				 
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Utility element to store a 2-point range of ordinal values. If one member is a null, then this is a single ended interval.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Restriction of list type to store a 2-point range of ordinal values. If one member is a null, then this is a single ended interval.
		
		 
			 
				 
			
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Utility element to store a 2-point range of frequency values. If one member is a null, then this is a single ended interval.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Restriction of list type to store a 2-point range of frequency values. If one member is a null, then this is a single ended interval.
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	
	 
		 
			 Element which refers to, or contains, a Value
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Element which refers to, or contains, a Value.  This version is used in CompositeValues.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 GML property which refers to, or contains, a Value
		
		 
			 
		
		 
	
	
	
	 
		 
			 Element which refers to, or contains, a set of homogeneously typed Values.
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 GML property which refers to, or contains, a set of homogeneously typed Values.
		
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
		 
			 Property whose content is a scalar value.
		
		 
			 
				 
					
					 
				
			
		
	
	 
		 
			 Property whose content is a Boolean value.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
				
			
		
	
	 
		 
			 Property whose content is a Category.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
				
			
		
	
	 
		 
			 Property whose content is a Quantity.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
				
			
		
	
	 
		 
			 Property whose content is a Count.
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
				
			
		
	
	




GML-3.1.1/smil/smil20-language.xsd
 
	
	 
	 
	 
		 
			 
				 
					 
				
				 
				 
				 
				 
				 
				 
			
		
	
	 
		 
		 
	
	 
		 
		 
		 
		 
		 
		 
		 
	
	 
		 
		 
		 
		 
		 
	
	 
	 
		 
			 
				 
					 
				
				 
				 
				 
				 
				 
				 
			
		
	
	 
	 
		 
			 
				 
					 
				
				 
				 
				 
				 
				 
				 
			
		
	
	 
	 
		 
			 
				 
					 
				
				 
				 
				 
				 
				 
			
		
	




GML-3.1.1/smil/smil20.xsd
 
	 
	
	 
	 
		 
		 
		 
	
	
	 
		 
	
	
	 
		 
		 
	
	
	 
		 
			 
		
	
	
	 
	 
		 
		 
		 
	
	 
		 
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
					 
				
			
		
	
	 
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
				
			
		
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
				
			
		
	
	 
		 
		 
		 
		 
	
	 
		 
	
	 
		 
	
	 
		 
			 
				 
					 
					 
					 
				
			
		
	
	 
	 
		 
		 
		 
	
	 
	 
		 
		 
		 
	
	 
	 
		 
		 
	
	
	 
		 
		 
	
	 
		 
			 
			 
			 
			 
		
	
	 
		 
		 
	
	 
		 
			 
			 
			 
			 
		
	
	 
		 
	
	 
		 
			 
			 
			 
			 
		
	
	 
		 
	
	 
		 
			 
			 
			 
			 
		
	
	 
		 
	
	 
		 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
		
	
	 
		 
	
	 
		 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
			 
		
	
	 
		 
		 
	
	 
		 
	
	 
		 
		 
	
	 
		 
	
	 
		 
		 
	




GML-3.1.1/smil/xml-mod.xsd
 
	 
		 
			 In due course, we should install the relevant ISO 2- and 3-letter
                codes as the enumerated possible values . . .
		
	
	 
		 
			 
				 
				 
			
		
	
	 
		 
		 
	




GML-3.1.1/xlink/ReadMe.txt
This XML Schema Document named xlinks.xsd has been stored here based 
on the change request: 
OGC 05-068r1 "Store xlinks.xsd file at a fixed location"

Arliss Whiteside, 2005-11-22





GML-3.1.1/xlink/xlinks.xsd
 
	 
		 xlinks.xsd v3.0b2 2001-07
		 
			GML 3.0 candidate xlinks schema. Copyright (c) 2001 OGC, All Rights Reserved.
		
	
	
	
	 
	
	 
	 
	 
	
	 
		 
			 
        The 'show' attribute is used to communicate the desired presentation 
        of the ending resource on traversal from the starting resource; it's 
        value should be treated as follows: 
        new - load ending resource in a new window, frame, pane, or other 
              presentation context
        replace - load the resource in the same window, frame, pane, or 
                  other presentation context
        embed - load ending resource in place of the presentation of the 
                starting resource
        other - behavior is unconstrained; examine other markup in the 
                link for hints 
        none - behavior is unconstrained 
      
		
		 
			 
				 
				 
				 
				 
				 
			
		
	
	 
		 
			 
        The 'actuate' attribute is used to communicate the desired timing 
        of traversal from the starting resource to the ending resource; 
        it's value should be treated as follows:
        onLoad - traverse to the ending resource immediately on loading 
                 the starting resource 
        onRequest - traverse from the starting resource to the ending 
                    resource only on a post-loading event triggered for 
                    this purpose 
        other - behavior is unconstrained; examine other markup in link 
                for hints 
        none - behavior is unconstrained
      
		
		 
			 
				 
				 
				 
				 
			
		
	
	
	 
	 
	 
	
	 
		 
		 
		 
		 
		 
		 
		 
	
	 
		 
		 
		 
	
	 
		 
		 
		 
		 
		 
	
	 
		 
		 
		 
		 
		 
		 
		 
	
	 
		 
		 
		 
		 
	
	 
		 
	
	 
		 
	




GML-3.1.1/GML-3.1.pdf


 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved i
 


 


 


Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc.  
Date:   2004-02-07 


Reference number of this OpenGIS project document:    OGC 03-105r1 


Version: 3.1.1 


Category: OpenGIS Recommendation Paper 


Editors:  Simon Cox, Paul Daisey, Ron Lake, Clemens Portele, Arliss Whiteside 


OpenGIS Geography Markup Language (GML) 
Implementation Specification 


 


 


 


 


 


 Notice: This 3.1.1 document is the same as version 3.1.0. The only changes are bug fixes in the online schemas.


 


 


 


 


Document type:    OpenGIS Recommendation Paper 
Document subtype:    - 
Document stage:    Final 
Document language:  English 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


ii  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


Copyright notice 


Copyright 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004 Open GIS Consortium, Inc. 
 
The companies listed above have granted the Open GIS Consortium, Inc. (OGC) a nonexclusive, royalty-free, paid 
up, worldwide license to copy and distribute this document and to modify this document and distribute copies of the 
modified version. 
 
This document does not represent a commitment to implement any portion of this specification in any companys 
products. 
 
OGCs Legal, IPR and Copyright Statements are found at http://www.opengis.org/about/?page=ipr&view=ipr 


 
NOTICE 


 
Permission to use, copy, and distribute this document in any medium for any purpose and without fee or royalty is 
hereby granted, provided that you include the above list of copyright holders and the entire text of this NOTICE.  
  
We request that authorship attribution be provided in any software, documents, or other items or products that you 
create pursuant to the implementation of the contents of this document, or any portion thereof. 
 
No right to create modifications or derivatives of OGC documents is granted pursuant to this license. However, if 
additional requirements (as documented in the Copyright FAQ at 
http://www.opengis.org/about/?page=ipr&view=ipr_faq) are satisfied, the right to create modifications or derivatives is 
sometimes granted by the OGC to individuals complying with those requirements. 
 
THIS DOCUMENT IS PROVIDED "AS IS," AND COPYRIGHT HOLDERS MAKE NO REPRESENTATIONS OR 
WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, WARRANTIES OF 
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, NON-INFRINGEMENT, OR TITLE; THAT THE 
CONTENTS OF THE DOCUMENT ARE SUITABLE FOR ANY PURPOSE; NOR THAT THE IMPLEMENTATION OF 
SUCH CONTENTS WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY THIRD PARTY PATENTS, COPYRIGHTS, TRADEMARKS OR 
OTHER RIGHTS. 
 
COPYRIGHT HOLDERS WILL NOT BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, SPECIAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL 
DAMAGES ARISING OUT OF ANY USE OF THE DOCUMENT OR THE PERFORMANCE OR IMPLEMENTATION 
OF THE CONTENTS THEREOF. 
 
The name and trademarks of copyright holders may NOT be used in advertising or publicity pertaining to this 
document or its contents without specific, written prior permission. Title to copyright in this document will at all times 
remain with copyright holders. 
 
RESTRICTED RIGHTS LEGEND. Use, duplication, or disclosure by government is subject to restrictions as set forth 
in subdivision (c)(1)(ii) of the Right in Technical Data and Computer Software Clause at DFARS 252.227.7013 


OpenGIS is a trademark or registered trademark of Open GIS Consortium, Inc. in the United States and in 
other countries. 


Warning 


This document is not an OGC Standard. It is distributed for review and comment. It is 
subject to change without notice and may not be referred to as an OGC Standard. 


Recipients of this document are invited to submit, with their comments, notification of 
any relevant patent rights of which they are aware and to provide supporting 
documentation. Attention is drawn to the possibility that some of the elements of this 
document may be the subject of patent rights. Open GIS Consortium shall not be held 
responsible for identifying any or all such patent rights.  However, to date, no such 
rights have been claimed or identified. 


 


 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved iii
 


 


Contents 


1 Scope...................................................................................................................................................... 1 
2 Conformance ......................................................................................................................................... 1 
3 Normative references ........................................................................................................................... 2 
4 Terms and definitions........................................................................................................................... 3 
5 Conventions .......................................................................................................................................... 9 
5.1 Deprecated parts of previous versions of GML ................................................................................. 9 
5.2 Symbols (and abbreviated terms) ....................................................................................................... 9 
5.3 UML Notation....................................................................................................................................... 10 
5.4 XML Schema........................................................................................................................................ 11 
6 Overview of GML Schemas................................................................................................................ 11 
6.1 Review of GML version 2  XML for Simple Features ..................................................................... 11 
6.2 GML version 3  more than Simple Features, plus ISO conformance .......................................... 11 
6.3 Backward compatibility ...................................................................................................................... 12 
6.4 GML 3 Application Schemas.............................................................................................................. 12 
6.5 How GML 3 components are factored into schema documents .................................................... 12 
6.6 GML schemas to import into your GML 3 Application Schema..................................................... 14 
7 GML schemas  general rules and base schemas .......................................................................... 15 
7.1 Introduction, namespaces, versioning ............................................................................................. 15 
7.2 Xlinks  Object Associations and Remote Properties .................................................................... 15 
7.3 Basic Types ......................................................................................................................................... 15 
7.3.1 Overview .............................................................................................................................................. 15 
7.3.2 Convenience types ............................................................................................................................. 16 
7.3.2.1 gml:NullType................................................................................................................................ 16 
7.3.2.2 gml:Null ........................................................................................................................................ 17 
7.3.2.3 gml:SignType............................................................................................................................... 17 
7.3.3 Simple content .................................................................................................................................... 18 
7.3.3.1 gml:booleanOrNull, gml:doubleOrNull, gml:integerOrNull, 


gml:NameOrNull, gml:stringOrNull ........................................................................................... 18 
7.3.3.2 gml:CodeType.............................................................................................................................. 18 
7.3.3.3 gml:MeasureType........................................................................................................................ 19 
7.3.4 Lists ...................................................................................................................................................... 19 
7.3.4.1 gml:booleanList, gml:doubleList, gml:integerList, gml:NameList, 


gml:NCNameList, gml:QNameList, gml:booleanOrNullList, 
gml:NameOrNullList, gml:doubleOrNullList, gml:integerOrNullList ..................................... 19 


7.3.4.2 gml:CodeListType, gml:CodeOrNullListType........................................................................... 20 
7.3.4.3 gml:MeasureListType, gml:MeasureOrNullListType ............................................................... 21 
7.4 GML model and syntax....................................................................................................................... 21 
7.4.1 GML instance documents .................................................................................................................. 21 
7.4.2 Lexical conventions............................................................................................................................ 22 
7.4.3 XML schema definition of GML languages....................................................................................... 22 
7.5 gmlBase schema................................................................................................................................. 23 
7.5.1 Goals of base schema ........................................................................................................................ 23 
7.5.2 Base objects ........................................................................................................................................ 23 
7.5.2.1 gml:_Object .................................................................................................................................. 23 
7.5.2.2 gml:_GML, gml:AbstractGMLType ............................................................................................ 23 
7.5.3 GML properties.................................................................................................................................... 24 
7.5.3.1 gml:_association, gml:AssociationType................................................................................... 24 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


iv  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


7.5.3.2 gml:AssociationAttributeGroup................................................................................................. 25 
7.5.4 By value or by reference? .................................................................................................................. 25 
7.5.4.1 gml:_strictAssociation................................................................................................................ 26 
7.5.4.2 gml:_reference, gml:ReferenceType ......................................................................................... 26 
7.5.5 Convenience properties and property types.................................................................................... 27 
7.5.5.1 gml:member ................................................................................................................................. 27 
7.5.5.2 gml:stringOrRefType................................................................................................................... 27 
7.5.6 Standard properties of GML Objects ................................................................................................ 27 
7.5.6.1 gml:metaDataProperty................................................................................................................ 28 
7.5.6.2 gml:description............................................................................................................................ 28 
7.5.6.3 gml:name...................................................................................................................................... 28 
7.5.6.4 gml:StandardObjectProperties .................................................................................................. 28 
7.5.6.5 gml:id ............................................................................................................................................ 28 
7.5.7 Bags and arrays .................................................................................................................................. 29 
7.5.7.1 gml:ArrayAssociationType......................................................................................................... 29 
7.5.7.2 gml:Array, gml:ArrayType, gml:Bag, gml:BagType................................................................. 29 
7.5.8 Metadata............................................................................................................................................... 30 
7.5.8.1 gml:metaDataProperty, gml:metaDataPropertyType, gml:_MetaData, 


gml:AbstractMetaDataType........................................................................................................ 30 
7.5.8.2 gml:GenericMetaData, gml:GenericMetaDataType .................................................................. 31 
8 GML schemas  feature model .......................................................................................................... 31 
8.1 General Concepts ............................................................................................................................... 31 
8.2 Feature schema................................................................................................................................... 31 
8.2.1 Features ............................................................................................................................................... 32 
8.2.1.1 gml:AbstractFeatureType........................................................................................................... 32 
8.2.1.2 gml:_Feature ................................................................................................................................ 32 
8.2.2 Standard feature properties ............................................................................................................... 33 
8.2.2.1 gml:boundedBy, gml:BoundingShapeType, 


gml:EnvelopeWithTimePeriod , gml:EnvelopeWithTimePeriodType..................................... 33 
8.2.2.2 gml:location, gml:LocationPropertyType, gml:LocationKeyword, 


gml:LocationString...................................................................................................................... 33 
8.2.2.3 gml:priorityLocation, gml:priorityLocationType...................................................................... 34 
8.2.2.4 gml:featureProperty, gml:FeaturePropertyType, gml:featureMember .................................. 35 
8.2.2.5 gml:featureMembers, gml:FeatureArrayPropertyType............................................................ 35 
8.2.3 Geometry Properties........................................................................................................................... 35 
8.2.4 Topology Properties ........................................................................................................................... 37 
8.2.5 Temporal Properties ........................................................................................................................... 38 
8.2.5.1 General purpose temporal properties ....................................................................................... 38 
8.2.5.2 Specific temporal properties...................................................................................................... 38 
8.2.6 Defining specific feature types.......................................................................................................... 39 
8.2.6.1 gml:BoundedFeatureType.......................................................................................................... 39 
8.2.7 Feature Collections............................................................................................................................. 40 
8.2.7.1 gml:AbstractFeatureCollectionType ......................................................................................... 40 
8.2.7.2 gml:_FeatureCollection, gml:FeatureCollection, 


gml:FeatureCollectionType ........................................................................................................ 40 
8.3 Spatial reference system used in a feature or feature collection .................................................. 41 
9 GML schemas  basic geometry ....................................................................................................... 41 
9.1 General Concepts ............................................................................................................................... 41 
9.1.1 Overview .............................................................................................................................................. 41 
9.1.2 Abstract Geometry.............................................................................................................................. 42 
9.1.2.1 gml:AbstractGeometryType ....................................................................................................... 42 
9.1.2.2 SRSReferenceGroup................................................................................................................... 42 
9.1.2.3 SRSInformationGroup................................................................................................................. 43 
9.1.2.4 gml:_Geometry ............................................................................................................................ 43 
9.1.2.5 gml:GeometryPropertyType....................................................................................................... 43 
9.1.2.6 gml:GeometryArrayPropertyType ............................................................................................. 44 
9.1.3 Coordinate Geometry ......................................................................................................................... 44 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved v
 


 


9.1.3.1 gml:DirectPositionType, gml:pos .............................................................................................. 44 
9.1.3.2 gml:DirectPositionListType, gml:posList ................................................................................. 44 
9.1.3.3 gml:geometricPositionGroup..................................................................................................... 45 
9.1.3.4 gml:geometricPositionListGroup .............................................................................................. 45 
9.1.3.5 gml:CoordinatesType, gml:coordinates ................................................................................... 45 
9.1.3.6 gml:CoordType, gml:coord ........................................................................................................ 46 
9.1.4 Vectors ................................................................................................................................................. 46 
9.1.4.1 gml:VectorType, gml:Vector....................................................................................................... 46 
9.1.5 Envelopes ............................................................................................................................................ 47 
9.1.5.1 gml:EnvelopeType, gml:Envelope............................................................................................. 47 
9.2 Geometric Primitives .......................................................................................................................... 47 
9.2.1 Simple Geometric Primitives (0- and 1-dimensional)...................................................................... 47 
9.2.1.1 gml:AbstractGeometricPrimitiveType, gml:_GeometricPrimitive .......................................... 47 
9.2.1.2 gml:PointType, gml:Point ........................................................................................................... 48 
9.2.1.3 gml:PointPropertyType, gml:pointProperty ............................................................................. 48 
9.2.1.4 gml:PointArrayPropertyType, gml:pointArrayProperty .......................................................... 49 
9.2.1.5 gml:AbstractCurveType, gml:_Curve........................................................................................ 49 
9.2.1.6 gml:CurvePropertyType, gml:curveProperty ........................................................................... 49 
9.2.1.7 gml:CurveArrayPropertyType, gml:curveArrayProperty ........................................................ 50 
9.2.1.8 gml:LineStringType, gml:LineString ......................................................................................... 50 
9.2.1.9 gml:LineStringPropertyType, gml:lineStringProperty............................................................. 51 
9.2.2 Simple Geometric Primitives (2-dimensional).................................................................................. 51 
9.2.2.1 gml:AbstractSurfaceType, gml:_Surface.................................................................................. 51 
9.2.2.2 gml:SurfacePropertyType, gml:surfaceProperty ..................................................................... 51 
9.2.2.3 gml:SurfaceArrayPropertyType, gml:surfaceArrayProperty .................................................. 52 
9.2.2.4 gml:PolygonType, gml:Polygon ................................................................................................ 52 
9.2.2.5 gml:exterior, gml:interior, gml:outerBoundaryIs, gml:InnerBoundaryIs............................... 52 
9.2.2.6 gml:AbstractRingType, gml:_Ring ............................................................................................ 53 
9.2.2.7 gml:AbstractRingPropertyType ................................................................................................. 53 
9.2.2.8 gml:LinearRingType, gml:LinearRing ....................................................................................... 53 
9.2.2.9 gml:LinearRingPropertyType..................................................................................................... 54 
9.2.2.10 gml:PolygonPropertyType, gml:polygonProperty ................................................................... 54 
10 GML schemas  more geometric primitives..................................................................................... 54 
10.1 Overview .............................................................................................................................................. 54 
10.2 Additional geometric primitives ........................................................................................................ 55 
10.2.1 1-dimensional geometric primitives.................................................................................................. 55 
10.2.1.1 gml:CurveType, gml:Curve......................................................................................................... 55 
10.2.1.2 gml:AbstractCurveSegmentType, gml:_CurveSegment ......................................................... 55 
10.2.1.3 gml:CurveSegmentArrayPropertyType, gml:segments .......................................................... 56 
10.2.1.4 gml:CurveInterpolationType....................................................................................................... 56 
10.2.1.5 gml:LineStringSegmentType, gml:LineStringSegment........................................................... 56 
10.2.1.6 gml:ArcStringType, gml:ArcString ............................................................................................ 57 
10.2.1.7 gml:ArcType, gml:Arc ................................................................................................................. 58 
10.2.1.8 gml:CircleType, gml:Circle......................................................................................................... 59 
10.2.1.9 gml:ArcStringByBulgeType, gml:ArcStringByBulge............................................................... 59 
10.2.1.10 gml:ArcByBulgeType, gml:ArcByBulge.................................................................................... 60 
10.2.1.11 gml:ArcByCenterPointType, gml:ArcByCenterPoint............................................................... 61 
10.2.1.12 gml:CircleByCenterPointType, gml:CircleByCenterPoint....................................................... 62 
10.2.1.13 gml:CubicSplineType, gml:CubicSpline ................................................................................... 62 
10.2.1.14 gml:BSplineType, gml:BSpline .................................................................................................. 64 
10.2.1.15 gml:KnotType, gml:KnotPropertyType ..................................................................................... 65 
10.2.1.16 gml:KnotTypesType .................................................................................................................... 65 
10.2.1.17 gml:BezierType, gml:Bezier ....................................................................................................... 65 
10.2.1.18 gml:OrientableCurveType, gml:OrientableCurve, gml:baseCurve ........................................ 66 
10.2.1.19 gml:OffsetCurveType, gml:OffsetCurve.................................................................................... 67 
10.2.1.20 gml:AffinePlacementType, gml:AffinePlacement .................................................................... 68 
10.2.1.21 gml:ClothoidType, gml:Clothoid................................................................................................ 68 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


vi  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


10.2.1.22 gml:GeodesicStringType, gml:GeodesicSting......................................................................... 69 
10.2.1.23 gml:GeodesicType, gml:Geodesic ............................................................................................ 70 
10.2.2 2-dimensional geometric primitives.................................................................................................. 70 
10.2.2.1 gml:SurfaceType, gml:Surface .................................................................................................. 70 
10.2.2.2 gml:AbstractSurfacePatchType, gml :_SurfacePatch............................................................. 70 
10.2.2.3 gml:SurfacePatchArrayPropertyType, gml:patches................................................................ 71 
10.2.2.4 gml:SurfaceInterpolationType ................................................................................................... 71 
10.2.2.5 gml:PolygonPatchType............................................................................................................... 71 
10.2.2.6 gml:TriangleType, gml:Triangle................................................................................................. 72 
10.2.2.7 gml:RectangleType, gml:Rectangle .......................................................................................... 72 
10.2.2.8 gml:RingType............................................................................................................................... 72 
10.2.2.9 gml:RingPropertyType................................................................................................................ 73 
10.2.2.10 gml:OrientableSurfaceType, gml:OrientableSurface, gml:baseSurface ............................... 73 
10.2.2.11 gml:PointGrid............................................................................................................................... 74 
10.2.2.12 gml:AbstractParametricCurveSurfaceType, 


gml:_ParametricCurveSurface................................................................................................... 74 
10.2.2.13 gml:AbstractGriddedSurfaceType, gml:_GriddedSurface ...................................................... 75 
10.2.2.14 gml:ConeType, gml:Cone........................................................................................................... 76 
10.2.2.15 gml:CylinderType, gmlCylinder ................................................................................................. 76 
10.2.2.16 gml: SphereType, gml:Sphere ................................................................................................... 77 
10.2.2.17 gml:PolyhedralSurfaceType, gml:PolyhedralSurface ............................................................. 78 
10.2.2.18 gml:PolygonPatchArrayPropertyType, gml:PolygonPatches ................................................ 78 
10.2.2.19 gml:TriangulatedSurfaceType, gml:TriangulatedSurface ....................................................... 78 
10.2.2.20 gml:TrianglePatchArrayPropertyType, gml:TrianglePatches................................................. 79 
10.2.2.21 gml:TinType, gml:Tin .................................................................................................................. 79 
10.2.2.22 gml:LineStringSegmentArrayPropertyType ............................................................................. 80 
10.2.3 3-dimensional geometric primitives.................................................................................................. 80 
10.2.3.1 gml:AbstractSolidType, gml:_Solid........................................................................................... 80 
10.2.3.2 gml:SolidPropertyType, gml:solidProperty.............................................................................. 81 
10.2.3.3 gml:SolidArrayPropertyType, gml:solidArrayProperty........................................................... 81 
10.2.3.4 gml:SolidType, gml:Solid ........................................................................................................... 81 
11 GML schemas  geometric complex, geometric composites and geometric 


aggregates ........................................................................................................................................... 82 
11.1 Overview .............................................................................................................................................. 82 
11.2 Geometric complex and geometric composites.............................................................................. 82 
11.2.1 Composite Geometries....................................................................................................................... 83 
11.2.1.1 gml:CompositeCurveType, gml:CompositeCurve ................................................................... 83 
11.2.1.2 gml:CompositeSurfaceType, gml:CompositeSurface ............................................................. 83 
11.2.1.3 gml:CompositeSolidType, gml:CompositeSolid...................................................................... 84 
11.2.2 Geometric Complex ............................................................................................................................ 84 
11.2.2.1 gml:GeometricComplexType, gml:GeometricComplex........................................................... 84 
11.2.2.2 gml:GeometricComplexPropertyType....................................................................................... 84 
11.3 Geometric Aggregates........................................................................................................................ 85 
11.3.1 Aggregates of unspecified dimensionality....................................................................................... 85 
11.3.1.1 gml:AbstractGeometricAggregateType, gml:_GeometricAggregate..................................... 85 
11.3.1.2 gml:MultiGeometryType, gml:MultiGeometry, gml:geometryMember, 


gml:geometryMembers ............................................................................................................... 85 
11.3.1.3 gml:MultiGeometryPropertyType, gml:multiGeometryProperty ............................................ 86 
11.3.2 0-dimensional aggregates.................................................................................................................. 86 
11.3.2.1 gml:MultiPointType, gml:MultiPoint, gml:pointMember, 


gml:pointMembers ...................................................................................................................... 86 
11.3.2.2 gml:MultiPointPropertyType, gml:multiPointProperty ............................................................ 86 
11.3.3 1-dimensional aggregates.................................................................................................................. 87 
11.3.3.1 gml:MultiCurveType, gml:multiCurve, gml:curveMembers .................................................... 87 
11.3.3.2 gml:MultiCurvePropertyType, gml:multiCurveProperty.......................................................... 87 
11.3.3.3 gml:lineStringMember................................................................................................................. 88 
11.3.3.4 gml:MultiLineStringType, gml:MultiLineString ........................................................................ 88 
11.3.3.5 gml:MultiLineStringPropertyType ............................................................................................. 88 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved vii
 


 


11.3.4 2-dimensional aggregates.................................................................................................................. 88 
11.3.4.1 gml:MultiSurfaceType, gml:MultiSurface, gml :surfaceMember, 


gml :surfaceMembers ................................................................................................................. 88 
11.3.4.2 gml:MultiSurfacePropertyType, gml:multiSurfaceProperty.................................................... 89 
11.3.4.3 gml:MultiPolygonType, gml:MultiPolygon, gml:polygonMember.......................................... 89 
11.3.4.4 gml:MultiPolygonPropertyType ................................................................................................. 90 
11.3.5 3-dimensional aggregates.................................................................................................................. 90 
11.3.5.1 gml:MultiSolidType, gml:MultiSolid, gml:solidMember, 


gml:solidMembers....................................................................................................................... 90 
11.3.5.2 gml:MultiSolidPropertyType, gml:multiSolidProperty ............................................................ 91 
12 GML schemas  Coordinate reference systems schemas ............................................................. 91 
12.1 Overview .............................................................................................................................................. 91 
12.1.1 Introduction ......................................................................................................................................... 91 
12.1.2 Coordinates ......................................................................................................................................... 91 
12.1.3 Some geodetic concepts.................................................................................................................... 92 
12.1.4 Non-geodetic coordinate reference systems................................................................................... 93 
12.1.4.1 Introduction.................................................................................................................................. 93 
12.1.4.2 Geocentric CRS ........................................................................................................................... 93 
12.1.4.3 Temporal CRS.............................................................................................................................. 93 
12.1.4.4 Engineering CRS ......................................................................................................................... 93 
12.1.4.5 Image CRS.................................................................................................................................... 94 
12.1.4.6 Derived CRS................................................................................................................................. 94 
12.1.5 Important XML elements .................................................................................................................... 94 
12.2 referenceSystems schema................................................................................................................. 96 
12.2.1 Overview .............................................................................................................................................. 96 
12.2.2 Identification........................................................................................................................................ 97 
12.2.2.1 gml:IdentifierType ....................................................................................................................... 97 
12.2.2.2 gml:version .................................................................................................................................. 97 
12.2.2.3 gml:remarks ................................................................................................................................. 97 
12.2.2.4 gml:SimpleNameType................................................................................................................. 97 
12.2.2.5 gml:scope..................................................................................................................................... 98 
12.2.3 Validity.................................................................................................................................................. 98 
12.2.3.1 gml:validArea............................................................................................................................... 98 
12.2.3.2 gml:ExtentType............................................................................................................................ 98 
12.2.3.3 gml:boundingBox........................................................................................................................ 98 
12.2.3.4 gml:boundingPolygon ................................................................................................................ 98 
12.2.3.5 gml:verticalExtent ....................................................................................................................... 98 
12.2.3.6 gml:temporalExtent..................................................................................................................... 99 
12.2.4 High-level coordinate reference system........................................................................................... 99 
12.2.4.1 gml:_ReferenceSystem............................................................................................................... 99 
12.2.4.2 gml:srsName................................................................................................................................ 99 
12.2.4.3 gml:srsID ...................................................................................................................................... 99 
12.2.4.4 gml:referenceSystemRef .......................................................................................................... 100 
12.2.4.5 gml:_CRS.................................................................................................................................... 100 
12.2.4.6 gml:crsRef .................................................................................................................................. 100 
12.3 coordinateReferenceSystems schema ........................................................................................... 100 
12.3.1 Overview ............................................................................................................................................ 100 
12.3.1.1 Introduction................................................................................................................................ 100 
12.3.1.2 Principal types of coordinate reference systems .................................................................. 101 
12.3.1.3 Compound coordinate reference systems ............................................................................. 102 
12.3.1.4 Derived coordinate reference systems ................................................................................... 102 
12.3.1.5 Schema introduction................................................................................................................. 103 
12.3.2 Abstract coordinate reference systems ......................................................................................... 103 
12.3.2.1 gml:_CoordinateReferenceSystem.......................................................................................... 103 
12.3.2.2 gml:coordinateReferenceSystemRef ...................................................................................... 103 
12.3.2.3 gml:_GeneralDerivedCRS......................................................................................................... 104 
12.3.2.4 gml:baseCRS ............................................................................................................................. 104 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


viii  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


12.3.2.5 gml:definedByConversion........................................................................................................ 104 
12.3.2.6 gml:generalDerivedCRSRef...................................................................................................... 104 
12.3.3 Concrete coordinate reference systems ........................................................................................ 104 
12.3.3.1 gml:CompoundCRS .................................................................................................................. 104 
12.3.3.2 gml:includesCRS....................................................................................................................... 105 
12.3.3.3 gml:compoundCRSRef ............................................................................................................. 105 
12.3.3.4 gml:GeographicCRS ................................................................................................................. 105 
12.3.3.5 gml:usesEllipsoidalCS.............................................................................................................. 106 
12.3.3.6 gml:usesGeodeticDatum .......................................................................................................... 106 
12.3.3.7 gml:geographicCRSRef ............................................................................................................ 106 
12.3.3.8 gml:VerticalCRS ........................................................................................................................ 106 
12.3.3.9 gml:usesVerticalCS................................................................................................................... 106 
12.3.3.10 gml:usesVerticalDatum............................................................................................................. 106 
12.3.3.11 gml:verticalCRSRef ................................................................................................................... 107 
12.3.3.12 gml:GeocentricCRS................................................................................................................... 107 
12.3.3.13 gml:usesCartesianCS ............................................................................................................... 107 
12.3.3.14 gml:usesSphericalCS................................................................................................................ 107 
12.3.3.15 gml:geocentricCRSRef ............................................................................................................. 107 
12.3.3.16 gml:ProjectedCRS..................................................................................................................... 108 
12.3.3.17 gml:projectedCRSRef ............................................................................................................... 108 
12.3.3.18 gml:DerivedCRS ........................................................................................................................ 108 
12.3.3.19 gml:derivedCRSType ................................................................................................................ 109 
12.3.3.20 gml:usesCS................................................................................................................................ 109 
12.3.3.21 gml:derivedCRSRef................................................................................................................... 109 
12.3.3.22 gml:EngineeringCRS................................................................................................................. 109 
12.3.3.23 gml:usesEngineeringDatum..................................................................................................... 110 
12.3.3.24 gml:engineeringCRSRef ........................................................................................................... 110 
12.3.3.25 gml:ImageCRS ........................................................................................................................... 110 
12.3.3.26 gml:usesObliqueCartesianCS.................................................................................................. 110 
12.3.3.27 gml:usesImageDatum ............................................................................................................... 111 
12.3.3.28 gml:imageCRSRef ..................................................................................................................... 111 
12.3.3.29 gml:TemporalCRS ..................................................................................................................... 111 
12.3.3.30 gml:usesTemporalCS................................................................................................................ 111 
12.3.3.31 gml:usesTemporalDatum ......................................................................................................... 111 
12.3.3.32 gml:temporalCRSRef ................................................................................................................ 111 
12.4 coordinateSystems schema............................................................................................................. 112 
12.4.1 Overview ............................................................................................................................................ 112 
12.4.1.1 Introduction................................................................................................................................ 112 
12.4.1.2 Coordinate system types.......................................................................................................... 112 
12.4.1.3 Coordinate system axis ............................................................................................................ 113 
12.4.1.4 Schema introduction................................................................................................................. 114 
12.4.2 Coordinate system axes................................................................................................................... 115 
12.4.2.1 gml:CoordinateSystemAxis ..................................................................................................... 115 
12.4.2.2 gml:axisName ............................................................................................................................ 115 
12.4.2.3 gml:axisID................................................................................................................................... 115 
12.4.2.4 gml:axisAbbrev.......................................................................................................................... 115 
12.4.2.5 gml:axisDirection ...................................................................................................................... 116 
12.4.2.6 gml:uom...................................................................................................................................... 116 
12.4.2.7 gml:coordinateSystemAxisRef ................................................................................................ 116 
12.4.3 Abstract coordinate system............................................................................................................. 116 
12.4.3.1 gml:_CoordinateSystem ........................................................................................................... 116 
12.4.3.2 gml:csName ............................................................................................................................... 117 
12.4.3.3 gml:csID...................................................................................................................................... 117 
12.4.3.4 gml:usesAxis ............................................................................................................................. 117 
12.4.3.5 Association to a coordinate system axis.gml:coordinateSystemRef.................................. 117 
12.4.4 Concrete coordinate systems.......................................................................................................... 118 
12.4.4.1 gml:EllipsoidalCS ...................................................................................................................... 118 
12.4.4.2 gml:ellipsoidalCSRef................................................................................................................. 118 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved ix
 


 


12.4.4.3 gml:CartesianCS........................................................................................................................ 118 
12.4.4.4 gml:cartesianCSRef .................................................................................................................. 118 
12.4.4.5 gml:VerticalCS ........................................................................................................................... 119 
12.4.4.6 gml:verticalCSRef...................................................................................................................... 119 
12.4.4.7 gml:TemporalCS........................................................................................................................ 119 
12.4.4.8 gml:temporalCSRef ................................................................................................................... 119 
12.4.4.9 gml:LinearCS ............................................................................................................................. 120 
12.4.4.10 gml:linearCSRef......................................................................................................................... 120 
12.4.4.11 gml:UserDefinedCS................................................................................................................... 120 
12.4.4.12 gml:userDefinedCSRef ............................................................................................................. 121 
12.4.4.13 gml:SphericalCS........................................................................................................................ 121 
12.4.4.14 gml:sphericalCSRef .................................................................................................................. 121 
12.4.4.15 gml:PolarCS ............................................................................................................................... 121 
12.4.4.16 gml:polarCSRef ......................................................................................................................... 122 
12.4.4.17 gml:CylindricalCS...................................................................................................................... 122 
12.4.4.18 gml:cylindricalCSRef ................................................................................................................ 122 
12.4.4.19 gml:ObliqueCartesianCS .......................................................................................................... 122 
12.4.4.20 gml:obliqueCartesianCSRef ..................................................................................................... 123 
12.5 datums schema ................................................................................................................................. 123 
12.5.1 Overview ............................................................................................................................................ 123 
12.5.1.1 Introduction................................................................................................................................ 123 
12.5.1.2 Geodetic datum ......................................................................................................................... 123 
12.5.1.3 Vertical datum............................................................................................................................ 124 
12.5.1.4 Image datum .............................................................................................................................. 124 
12.5.1.5 Engineering datum.................................................................................................................... 125 
12.5.1.6 Temporal datum......................................................................................................................... 125 
12.5.1.7 Schema introduction................................................................................................................. 125 
12.5.2 Abstract datum.................................................................................................................................. 125 
12.5.2.1 gml:_Datum................................................................................................................................ 125 
12.5.2.2 gml:datumName ........................................................................................................................ 126 
12.5.2.3 gml:datumID............................................................................................................................... 126 
12.5.2.4 gml:anchorPoint ........................................................................................................................ 126 
12.5.2.5 gml:realizationEpoch ................................................................................................................ 127 
12.5.2.6 gml:datumRef ............................................................................................................................ 127 
12.5.3 Geodetic datum................................................................................................................................. 127 
12.5.3.1 gml:GeodeticDatum .................................................................................................................. 127 
12.5.3.2 gml:usesPrimeMeridian ............................................................................................................ 127 
12.5.3.3 gml:usesEllipsoid...................................................................................................................... 127 
12.5.3.4 gml:geodeticDatumRef ............................................................................................................. 128 
12.5.3.5 gml:Ellipsoid .............................................................................................................................. 128 
12.5.3.6 gml:ellipsoidName..................................................................................................................... 129 
12.5.3.7 gml:ellipsoidID........................................................................................................................... 129 
12.5.3.8 gml:semiMajorAxis.................................................................................................................... 129 
12.5.3.9 gml:ellipsoidRef......................................................................................................................... 129 
12.5.3.10 gml:secondDefiningParameter ................................................................................................ 129 
12.5.3.11 gml:inverseFlattening ............................................................................................................... 129 
12.5.3.12 gml:semiMinorAxis ................................................................................................................... 130 
12.5.3.13 gml:isSphere.............................................................................................................................. 130 
12.5.3.14 gml:PrimeMeridian .................................................................................................................... 130 
12.5.3.15 gml:meridianName .................................................................................................................... 130 
12.5.3.16 gml:meridianID .......................................................................................................................... 131 
12.5.3.17 gml:greenwichLongitude.......................................................................................................... 131 
12.5.3.18 gml:primeMeridianRef............................................................................................................... 131 
12.5.4 Other concrete datums..................................................................................................................... 131 
12.5.4.1 gml:EngineeringDatum............................................................................................................. 131 
12.5.4.2 gml:engineeringDatumRef........................................................................................................ 131 
12.5.4.3 gml:ImageDatum ....................................................................................................................... 132 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


x  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


12.5.4.4 gml:pixelInCell ........................................................................................................................... 132 
12.5.4.5 gml:imageDatumRef.................................................................................................................. 132 
12.5.4.6 gml:VerticalDatum..................................................................................................................... 132 
12.5.4.7 gml:verticalDatumType............................................................................................................. 133 
12.5.4.8 gml:verticalDatumRef ............................................................................................................... 133 
12.5.4.9 gml:TemporalDatum.................................................................................................................. 133 
12.5.4.10 gml:origin ................................................................................................................................... 134 
12.5.4.11 gml:temporalDatumRef............................................................................................................. 134 
12.6 coordinateOperations schema ........................................................................................................ 134 
12.6.1 Overview ............................................................................................................................................ 134 
12.6.1.1 Introduction................................................................................................................................ 134 
12.6.1.2 Coordinate operation types...................................................................................................... 135 
12.6.1.3 Coordinate conversions ........................................................................................................... 135 
12.6.1.4 Concatenated coordinate operation........................................................................................ 135 
12.6.1.5 Pass-through coordinate operation ........................................................................................ 136 
12.6.1.6 Operation method and parameters.......................................................................................... 136 
12.6.1.7 Schema introduction................................................................................................................. 137 
12.6.2 Abstract coordinate operations....................................................................................................... 137 
12.6.2.1 gml:_CoordinateOperation....................................................................................................... 137 
12.6.2.2 gml:coordinateOperationName................................................................................................ 138 
12.6.2.3 gml:coordinateOperationID...................................................................................................... 138 
12.6.2.4 gml:operationVersion ............................................................................................................... 138 
12.6.2.5 gml:sourceCRS.......................................................................................................................... 138 
12.6.2.6 gml:targetCRS ........................................................................................................................... 138 
12.6.2.7 gml:coordinateOperationRef.................................................................................................... 138 
12.6.2.8 gml:_SingleOperation ............................................................................................................... 139 
12.6.2.9 gml:singleOperationRef............................................................................................................ 139 
12.6.2.10 gml:_Operation .......................................................................................................................... 139 
12.6.2.11 gml:operationRef....................................................................................................................... 140 
12.6.2.12 gml:_GeneralConversion.......................................................................................................... 140 
12.6.2.13 gml:generalConversionRef....................................................................................................... 140 
12.6.2.14 gml:_GeneralTransformation ................................................................................................... 141 
12.6.2.15 gml:generalTransformationRef................................................................................................ 141 
12.6.3 Concrete coordinate operations...................................................................................................... 142 
12.6.3.1 gml:ConcatenatedOperation .................................................................................................... 142 
12.6.3.2 gml:usesSingleOperation......................................................................................................... 142 
12.6.3.3 gml:concatenatedOperationRef............................................................................................... 142 
12.6.3.4 gml:PassThroughOperation..................................................................................................... 142 
12.6.3.5 gml:modifiedCoordinate ........................................................................................................... 143 
12.6.3.6 A positive integer defining a position in a coordinate 


tuple.gml:usesOperation .......................................................................................................... 143 
12.6.3.7 gml:passThroughOperationRef ............................................................................................... 143 
12.6.3.8 gml:Conversion ......................................................................................................................... 143 
12.6.3.9 gml:usesMethod ........................................................................................................................ 144 
12.6.3.10 gml:usesValue ........................................................................................................................... 144 
12.6.3.11 Composition association to a parameter value used by this 


coordinate operation.gml:conversionRef ............................................................................... 144 
12.6.3.12 gml:Transformation................................................................................................................... 144 
12.6.3.13 gml:transformationRef.............................................................................................................. 145 
12.6.4 Parameter values and groups.......................................................................................................... 145 
12.6.4.1 gml:_generalParameterValue................................................................................................... 145 
12.6.4.2 gml:parameterValue .................................................................................................................. 145 
12.6.4.3 gml:value.................................................................................................................................... 146 
12.6.4.4 gml:dmsAngleValue .................................................................................................................. 146 
12.6.4.5 gml:stringValue ......................................................................................................................... 146 
12.6.4.6 gml:integerValue ....................................................................................................................... 146 
12.6.4.7 gml:booleanValue...................................................................................................................... 146 
12.6.4.8 gml:valueList ............................................................................................................................. 146 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved xi
 


 


12.6.4.9 gml:integerValueList ................................................................................................................. 146 
12.6.4.10 gml:valueFile.............................................................................................................................. 147 
12.6.4.11 gml:valueOfParameter .............................................................................................................. 147 
12.6.4.12 gml:parameterValueGroup ....................................................................................................... 147 
12.6.4.13 gml:includesValue..................................................................................................................... 147 
12.6.4.14 gml:valuesOfGroup ................................................................................................................... 147 
12.6.5 Operation method ............................................................................................................................. 148 
12.6.5.1 gml:OperationMethod ............................................................................................................... 148 
12.6.5.2 gml:methodName ...................................................................................................................... 148 
12.6.5.3 gml:methodID ............................................................................................................................ 148 
12.6.5.4 gml:methodFormula.................................................................................................................. 148 
12.6.5.5 gml:sourceDimensions.......................................................................................................... 149 
12.6.5.6 gml:targetDimensions............................................................................................................ 149 
12.6.5.7 gml:usesParameter ................................................................................................................... 149 
12.6.5.8 gml:operationMethodRef .......................................................................................................... 149 
12.6.6 Operation parameters and groups .................................................................................................. 149 
12.6.6.1 gml:GeneralOperationParameter ............................................................................................. 149 
12.6.6.2 gml:minimumOccurs................................................................................................................. 150 
12.6.6.3 gml:abstractGeneralOperationParameterRef......................................................................... 150 
12.6.6.4 gml:OperationParameter .......................................................................................................... 150 
12.6.6.5 gml:parameterName.................................................................................................................. 151 
12.6.6.6 gml:parameterID ........................................................................................................................ 151 
12.6.6.7 gml:operationParameterRef ..................................................................................................... 151 
12.6.6.8 gml:OperationParameterGroup ............................................................................................... 151 
12.6.6.9 gml:groupName ......................................................................................................................... 152 
12.6.6.10 gml:groupID ............................................................................................................................... 152 
12.6.6.11 gml:maximumOccurs................................................................................................................ 152 
12.6.6.12 gml:includesParameter............................................................................................................. 152 
12.6.6.13 gml:operationParameterGroupRef .......................................................................................... 152 
12.7 dataQuality schema .......................................................................................................................... 153 
12.7.1 Overview ............................................................................................................................................ 153 
12.7.2 All elements ....................................................................................................................................... 153 
12.7.2.1 gml:_positionalAccuracy.......................................................................................................... 153 
12.7.2.2 gml:measureDescription .......................................................................................................... 154 
12.7.2.3 gml:absoluteExternalPositionalAccuracy .............................................................................. 154 
12.7.2.4 gml:relativeInternalPositionalAccuracy.................................................................................. 154 
12.7.2.5 gml:result ................................................................................................................................... 154 
12.7.2.6 gml:covarianceMatrix................................................................................................................ 154 
12.7.2.7 gml:includesElement ................................................................................................................ 155 
12.7.2.8 gml:rowIndex ............................................................................................................................. 155 
12.7.2.9 gml:columnIndex....................................................................................................................... 155 
12.7.2.10 gml:covariance .......................................................................................................................... 155 
13 GML schemas  topology................................................................................................................. 155 
13.1 Introduction ....................................................................................................................................... 155 
13.2 Topology Model................................................................................................................................. 156 
13.3 Types and elements.......................................................................................................................... 156 
13.3.1 Schema Includes............................................................................................................................... 156 
13.3.2 gml:AbstractTopologyType, gml:_Topology ................................................................................. 156 
13.3.3 gml:AbstractTopoPrimitive, gml:_TopoPrimtive ........................................................................... 156 
13.3.4 gml:NodeType, gml:Node................................................................................................................. 157 
13.3.5 gml:DirectedNodePropertyType, gml:directedNode ..................................................................... 157 
13.3.6 gml:EdgeType, gml:Edge................................................................................................................. 157 
13.3.7 gml:DirectedEdgePropertyType, gml:directedEdge ..................................................................... 158 
13.3.8 gml:FaceType, gml:Face .................................................................................................................. 158 
13.3.9 gml:DirectedFacePropertyType, gml:directedFace....................................................................... 159 
13.3.10 gml:TopoSolidType, gml:TopoSolid ............................................................................................... 159 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


xii  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


13.3.11 gml:DirectedTopoSolidPropertyType, gml:directedTopoSolid.................................................... 159 
13.3.12 gml:isolated ....................................................................................................................................... 160 
13.3.13 gml:container .................................................................................................................................... 160 
13.3.14 gml:TopoPointType, gmlTopoPoint ................................................................................................ 161 
13.3.15 gml:TopoPointPropertyType, gml:topoPointProperty .................................................................. 161 
13.3.16 gml:TopoCurveType, gml:TopoCurve ............................................................................................ 161 
13.3.17 gml:TopoCurvePropertyType, gml:topoCurveProperty................................................................ 162 
13.3.18 gml:TopoSurfaceType, gml:TopoSurface ...................................................................................... 162 
13.3.19 gml:TopoSurfacePropertyType, gml:topoSurfaceProperty.......................................................... 162 
13.3.20 gml:TopoVolumeType, gml:TopoVolume....................................................................................... 162 
13.3.21 gml:TopoVolumePropertyType, gml:topoVolumeProperty .......................................................... 163 
13.3.22 gml:TopoComplexType, gml:TopoComplex .................................................................................. 163 
13.3.23 Maximal, sub- and super-complexes .............................................................................................. 163 
13.3.24 gml:topoPrimitiveMember................................................................................................................ 164 
13.3.25 gml:topoPrimitiveMembers.............................................................................................................. 165 
13.3.26 gml:TopoComplexProperty, gml:topoComplexProperty.............................................................. 165 
14 GML schemas  temporal information and dynamic features ..................................................... 165 
14.1 Overview ............................................................................................................................................ 165 
14.2 Temporal schema.............................................................................................................................. 166 
14.2.1 Overview ............................................................................................................................................ 166 
14.2.2 urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-xsd:temporal:v3.1.0Temporal 


objects and properties...................................................................................................................... 166 
14.2.2.1 gml:_TimeObject ....................................................................................................................... 166 
14.2.2.2 gml:_TimePrimitive ................................................................................................................... 166 
14.2.2.3 gml:TimePrimitivePropertyType, gml:validTime.................................................................... 167 
14.2.2.4 gml:RelatedTimeType ............................................................................................................... 167 
14.2.2.5 gml:_TimeComplex ................................................................................................................... 167 
14.2.3 Temporal geometry........................................................................................................................... 168 
14.2.3.1 gml:_TimeGeometricPrimitive ................................................................................................. 168 
14.2.3.2 gml:TimeInstant......................................................................................................................... 168 
14.2.3.3 gml:TimeInstantPropertyType ................................................................................................. 169 
14.2.3.4 gml:TimePeriod ......................................................................................................................... 169 
14.2.3.5 gml:timePeriodPropertyType ................................................................................................... 170 
14.2.3.6 gml:TimePositionType, gml:timePosition............................................................................... 170 
14.2.3.7 gml:TimeLengthType, gml:_timeLength, gml:duration, 


gml:timeInterval, gml:TimeUnitType ....................................................................................... 172 
14.3 Temporal topology schema ............................................................................................................. 173 
14.3.1 Overview ............................................................................................................................................ 173 
14.3.2 Temporal topology objects .............................................................................................................. 174 
14.3.2.1 gml:_TimeTopologyPrimitive ................................................................................................... 174 
14.3.2.2 gml:TimeTopologyPrimitivePropertyType.............................................................................. 175 
14.3.2.3 gml:TimeTopologyComplex ..................................................................................................... 175 
14.3.2.4 gml:TimeNode............................................................................................................................ 175 
14.3.2.5 gml:TimeNodePropertyType .................................................................................................... 176 
14.3.2.6 gml:TimeEdge............................................................................................................................ 176 
14.3.2.7 gml:TimeEdgePropertyType..................................................................................................... 176 
14.3.2.8 gml:SuccessionType................................................................................................................. 176 
14.4 Temporal reference systems ........................................................................................................... 177 
14.4.1 Overview ............................................................................................................................................ 177 
14.4.2 Basic temporal reference system.................................................................................................... 177 
14.4.2.1 gml:TimeReferenceSystem ...................................................................................................... 177 
14.4.3 Time Coordinate Systems................................................................................................................ 178 
14.4.3.1 gml:TimeCoordinateSystem..................................................................................................... 178 
14.4.4 Calendars and clocks ....................................................................................................................... 179 
14.4.4.1 gml:TimeCalendar, gml:TimeCalendarEra.............................................................................. 179 
14.4.4.2 gml:TimeClock........................................................................................................................... 180 
14.4.5 Time Ordinal Reference Systems.................................................................................................... 181 
14.4.5.1 gml:TimeOrdinalReferenceSystem, gml:TimeOrdinalEra ..................................................... 181 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved xiii
 


 


14.5 Representing dynamic features ...................................................................................................... 183 
14.5.1 Overview ............................................................................................................................................ 183 
14.5.2 gml:dataSource ................................................................................................................................. 184 
14.5.3 Dynamic Properties .......................................................................................................................... 184 
14.5.4 Dynamic Features ............................................................................................................................. 184 
14.5.5 gml:DynamicFeatureCollection ....................................................................................................... 184 
14.5.6 gml:_TimeSlice.................................................................................................................................. 185 
14.5.7 gml:MovingObjectStatus.................................................................................................................. 186 
14.5.8 gml:history......................................................................................................................................... 186 
14.5.9 gml:track ............................................................................................................................................ 187 
15 GML schemas  definitions and dictionaries................................................................................. 187 
15.1 Overview ............................................................................................................................................ 187 
15.2 Dictionary schema ............................................................................................................................ 188 
15.2.1 gml:Definition, gml:DefinitionType ................................................................................................. 188 
15.2.2 gml:Dictionary, gml:DefinitionCollection, gml:DictionaryType ................................................... 189 
15.2.3 gml:dictionaryEntry, gml:definitionMember, gml:DictionaryEntryType ..................................... 189 
15.2.4 gml:indirectEntry, gml:IndirectEntryType, gml:DefinitionProxy, 


gml:DefinitionProxyType.................................................................................................................. 189 
15.2.5 Using Definitions and Dictionaries ................................................................................................. 191 
16 GML schemas  units, measures and values................................................................................. 191 
16.1 Introduction ....................................................................................................................................... 191 
16.2 Units schema..................................................................................................................................... 192 
16.2.1 Using Unit Definitions....................................................................................................................... 192 
16.2.2 gml:unitOfMeasure, gml:UnitOfMeasureType................................................................................ 192 
16.2.3 gml:UnitDefinition, gml:UnitDefinitionType ................................................................................... 193 
16.2.4 gml: quantityType ............................................................................................................................. 193 
16.2.5 gml:catalogSymbol ........................................................................................................................... 193 
16.2.6 gml:BaseUnit, gml:BaseUnitType, gml:unitsSystem.................................................................... 194 
16.2.7 gml:DerivedUnit, gml:DerivedUnitType .......................................................................................... 194 
16.2.8 gml:derivationUnitTerms, gml:DerivationUnitTermType.............................................................. 194 
16.2.9 gml:ConventionalUnit, gml:ConventionalUnitType....................................................................... 195 
16.2.10 gml:conversionToPreferredUnit, gml:rouchConversionToPreferredUnit, 


gml:ConversionToPreferredUnitType, gml:FormulaType ............................................................ 195 
16.2.11 Example of units dictionary ............................................................................................................. 196 
16.3 Measures schema ............................................................................................................................. 202 
16.3.1 gml:measure...................................................................................................................................... 202 
16.3.2 Scalar measure types ....................................................................................................................... 202 
16.3.3 gml:angle ........................................................................................................................................... 203 
16.3.4 gml:dmsAngle ................................................................................................................................... 203 
16.3.5 gml:degrees....................................................................................................................................... 204 
16.3.6 gml:decimalMinutes.......................................................................................................................... 205 
16.3.7 gml:minutes ....................................................................................................................................... 205 
16.3.8 gml:seconds ...................................................................................................................................... 205 
16.3.9 gml:AngleChoiceType ...................................................................................................................... 205 
16.4 Value Objects schema...................................................................................................................... 205 
16.4.1 Introduction ....................................................................................................................................... 205 
16.4.2 Value element hierarchy................................................................................................................... 206 
16.4.3 gml:Boolean, gml:BooleanList ........................................................................................................ 206 
16.4.4 gml:Category, gml:CategoryList ..................................................................................................... 207 
16.4.5 gml:Count, gml:CountList................................................................................................................ 207 
16.4.6 gml:Quantity, gml:QuantityList ....................................................................................................... 207 
16.4.7 gml:_Value, gml:_ScalarValue, gml:_ScalarValueList .................................................................. 208 
16.4.8 gml:Value ........................................................................................................................................... 208 
16.4.9 gml:valueProperty, gml:valueComponent, gml:valueComponents ............................................ 208 
16.4.10 gml:CompositeValue ........................................................................................................................ 209 
16.4.11 gml:ValueArray.................................................................................................................................. 210 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


xiv  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


16.4.12 Typed ValueExtents: gml:CategoryExtent, gml:CountExtent, 
gml:QuantityExtent ........................................................................................................................... 211 


16.4.13 gml:BooleanPropertyType, gml:CategoryPropertyType, 
gml:CountPropertyType, gml:QuantityPropertyType ................................................................... 212 


17 GML schemas  directions............................................................................................................... 212 
17.1 Direction schema .............................................................................................................................. 212 
17.1.1 gml:direction, gml:DirectionPropertyType..................................................................................... 212 
17.1.2 gml:DirectionVector, gml:DirectionVectorType............................................................................. 213 
17.1.3 gml:CompassPoint, gml:CompassPointEnumeration .................................................................. 213 
17.1.4 Text Based Directions: gml:DirectionKeyword, gml:DirectionString.......................................... 214 
18 GML schemas  observations ......................................................................................................... 214 
18.1 Observations ..................................................................................................................................... 214 
18.2 Observation schema......................................................................................................................... 214 
18.2.1 gml:Observation................................................................................................................................ 214 
18.2.2 gml:using ........................................................................................................................................... 215 
18.2.3 gml:target........................................................................................................................................... 215 
18.2.4 gml:resultOf ....................................................................................................................................... 216 
18.3 Examples............................................................................................................................................ 216 
18.3.1 gml:Observation................................................................................................................................ 216 
18.3.2 gml:DirectedObservation ................................................................................................................. 216 
18.3.3 gml:DirectedObservationAtDistance .............................................................................................. 217 
19 GML schemas  coverages.............................................................................................................. 218 
19.1 The coverage model and representations...................................................................................... 218 
19.1.1 General Remarks............................................................................................................................... 218 
19.1.2 Formal description of a coverage ................................................................................................... 218 
19.1.3 Coverage in GML............................................................................................................................... 219 
19.2 Grids schema .................................................................................................................................... 220 
19.2.1 Unrectified Grid (gml:Grid)............................................................................................................... 220 
19.2.2 Rectified Grid (gml:RectifiedGrid)................................................................................................... 221 
19.3 Coverage schema ............................................................................................................................. 222 
19.3.1 gml:AbstractCoverageType, gml:_Coverage................................................................................. 222 
19.3.2 gml:AbstractDiscreteCoverageType, gml:_DiscreteCoverage .................................................... 223 
19.3.3 gml:AbstractContinuousCoverageType, gml:_ContinuousCoverage......................................... 223 
19.3.4 gml:domainSet, gml:DomainSetType ............................................................................................. 224 
19.3.5 gml:rangeSet, gml:RangeSetType .................................................................................................. 224 
19.3.6 gml:DataBlock ................................................................................................................................... 225 
19.3.7 gml:rangeParameters ....................................................................................................................... 225 
19.3.8 gml:tupleList...................................................................................................................................... 225 
19.3.9 gml:doubleOrNullTupleList.............................................................................................................. 226 
19.3.10 gml:File, gml:FileType ...................................................................................................................... 226 
19.3.11 gml:coverageFunction, gml:CoverageFunctionType.................................................................... 228 
19.3.12 gml:MappingRule .............................................................................................................................. 228 
19.3.13 gml:GridFunction, gml:GridFunctionType ..................................................................................... 228 
19.3.14 gml:sequenceRule, gml:SequenceRuleType, gml:SequenceRuleNames................................... 229 
19.3.15 Specific Coverage Types in GML 3.1 .............................................................................................. 231 
19.3.16 MultiPoint Coverage ......................................................................................................................... 231 
19.3.17 MultiCurve Coverage ........................................................................................................................ 233 
19.3.18 MultiSurface Coverage ..................................................................................................................... 234 
19.3.19 MultiSolid Coverage.......................................................................................................................... 236 
19.3.20 Gridded Coverage ............................................................................................................................. 236 
19.3.21 RectifiedGrid Coverage .................................................................................................................... 237 
20 GML schemas  default styling ....................................................................................................... 239 
20.1 General concepts .............................................................................................................................. 239 
20.2 Top-level styling elements ............................................................................................................... 241 
20.2.1 gml:defaultStyle ................................................................................................................................ 241 
20.2.2 gml:Style ............................................................................................................................................ 242 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved xv
 


 


20.3 Feature style ...................................................................................................................................... 243 
20.3.1 gml:FeatureStyle ............................................................................................................................... 243 
20.3.2 featureType........................................................................................................................................ 243 
20.3.3 baseType............................................................................................................................................ 244 
20.3.4 featureConstraint .............................................................................................................................. 244 
20.3.5 queryGrammar .................................................................................................................................. 244 
20.4 Geometry Style .................................................................................................................................. 244 
20.5 Topology Style .................................................................................................................................. 245 
20.6 Label Style ......................................................................................................................................... 246 
20.7 Common styling elements ............................................................................................................... 247 
20.7.1 Overview ............................................................................................................................................ 247 
20.7.2 gml:symbol ........................................................................................................................................ 247 
20.7.3 gml:styleVariation ............................................................................................................................. 248 
20.7.4 gml:spatialResolution....................................................................................................................... 249 
20.7.5 animation ........................................................................................................................................... 249 
20.8 Graph Style ........................................................................................................................................ 249 
21 Modularisation and Dependencies.................................................................................................. 250 
22 Profiles ............................................................................................................................................... 253 
22.1 Profiles of GML and application schemas...................................................................................... 253 
22.2 Definition of Profile ........................................................................................................................... 253 
22.3 Relation to application schema ....................................................................................................... 253 
22.4 Rules for elements and types in a profile....................................................................................... 253 
22.5 Recommendations for application schemas using GML profiles................................................ 254 
22.6 Summary of Rules for GML profiles................................................................................................ 255 
23 Rules for Application Schemes ....................................................................................................... 255 
23.1 GML Documents................................................................................................................................ 255 
23.2 GML Application Schemas............................................................................................................... 256 
23.2.1 Target Namespace ............................................................................................................................ 257 
23.2.2 Import GML Schema ......................................................................................................................... 257 
23.2.3 Object Type Derivation ..................................................................................................................... 257 
23.2.4 Elements Representing Objects...................................................................................................... 257 
23.2.5 Property Type Derivation ................................................................................................................. 257 
23.2.6 Elements Representing Properties ................................................................................................. 258 
23.3 Schemas defining Features and Feature Collections ................................................................... 258 
23.3.1 Target Namespace ............................................................................................................................ 258 
23.3.2 Import feature.xsd............................................................................................................................. 258 
23.3.3 Feature Type Derivation ................................................................................................................... 259 
23.3.4 Elements Representing Features .................................................................................................... 259 
23.3.5 Application Features are Features .................................................................................................. 259 
23.3.6 GML Feature Collection Document ................................................................................................. 259 
23.4 Schemas defining Geometries ........................................................................................................ 259 
23.4.1 Target Namespace ............................................................................................................................ 259 
23.4.2 Import a GML geometry schema ..................................................................................................... 259 
23.4.3 User-defined Geometry Types and Geometry Property Types .................................................... 260 
23.4.3.1 User-defined Geometry Types ................................................................................................. 260 
23.4.3.2 User-defined Geometry Property Types ................................................................................. 260 
23.5 Schemas defining Topologies ......................................................................................................... 261 
23.5.1 Target Namespace ............................................................................................................................ 261 
23.5.2 Import topology.xsd.......................................................................................................................... 261 
23.5.3 User-defined Topology Types and Topology Property Types ..................................................... 261 
23.5.3.1 User-defined Topology Types.................................................................................................. 261 
23.5.3.2 User-defined Topology Property Types .................................................................................. 261 
23.6 Schemas defining Time.................................................................................................................... 261 
23.6.1 Target Namespace ............................................................................................................................ 261 
23.6.2 Import temporal.xsd.......................................................................................................................... 261 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


xvi  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


23.6.3 User-defined Temporal Types and Temporal Property Types ..................................................... 262 
23.6.3.1 User-defined Temporal Types.................................................................................................. 262 
23.6.3.2 User-defined Temporal Property Types .................................................................................. 262 
23.7 Schemas defining Coordinate Reference Systems....................................................................... 262 
23.7.1 Target Namespace ............................................................................................................................ 263 
23.7.2 Import coordinateReferenceSystem.xsd ........................................................................................ 263 
23.8 Schemas defining Coverages.......................................................................................................... 263 
23.8.1 Target Namespace ............................................................................................................................ 263 
23.8.2 Import coverage.xsd ......................................................................................................................... 263 
23.8.3 Coverages shall derive from gml:AbstractDiscreteCoverageType or 


gml:AbstractContinuousCoverageType ......................................................................................... 263 
23.8.4 Range Parameters shall be Derived from gml:ValueType............................................................ 264 
23.8.5 Coverage Document ......................................................................................................................... 265 
23.9 Schemas defining Observations ..................................................................................................... 265 
23.9.1 Target Namespace ............................................................................................................................ 265 
23.9.2 Import observation.xsd .................................................................................................................... 265 
23.9.3 Observations shall derive from gml:ObservationType ................................................................. 265 
23.9.4 Observation Collections shall derive from gml:CollectionType .................................................. 265 
23.9.5 Observations are Features............................................................................................................... 265 
23.9.6 Observation Collection Document .................................................................................................. 266 
23.10 Schemas defining Dictionaries and Definitions ............................................................................ 266 
23.10.1 Target Namespace ............................................................................................................................ 266 
23.10.2 Import dictionary.xsd........................................................................................................................ 266 
23.10.3 Definitions shall derive from gml:DefinitionType.......................................................................... 266 
23.10.4 Dictionaries shall derive from gml:DictionaryType....................................................................... 267 
23.11 Schemas defining Values................................................................................................................. 267 
23.11.1 Target Namespace ............................................................................................................................ 267 
23.11.2 Import valueObjects.xsd or basicTypes.xsd.................................................................................. 267 
23.11.3 Construction of New Value Types................................................................................................... 267 
Annex A (normative)  Abstract Test Suite ................................................................................................... 268 
A.1  Conformance Class A. Conformance of the XML Implementation of GML data.............................. 268 
A.1.1  Existence of an applicable GML application schema...................................................................... 268 
A.1.2  Conformance of the applicable application schema ....................................................................... 268 
A.1.3  Conformance of the data set.............................................................................................................. 268 
A.2  Conformance Class B. Conformance of the XML Implementation of GML 


Application Schema.......................................................................................................................... 268 
A.2.1  XMLSchema valid ................................................................................................................................ 268 
A.2.2  GML model valid .................................................................................................................................. 269 
A.3  Conformance Class C. Conformance of the GML Interface Implementation for 


GML Data............................................................................................................................................ 269 
A.3.1  Serialization capability test ................................................................................................................ 269 
A.3.2  Serialization validity test..................................................................................................................... 269 
A.3.3  Transforming to and from XML format.............................................................................................. 269 
A.4  Conformance Class D. Conformance of the GML Interface Implementation for 


GML Application Schema................................................................................................................. 270 
A.4.1  Serialization capability test ................................................................................................................ 270 
A.4.2  Serialization validity test..................................................................................................................... 270 
A.4.3  Transforming to and from XML format.............................................................................................. 270 
Annex B (normative)  Conformance............................................................................................................. 271 
B.1  GML Object Rules................................................................................................................................... 271 
B.1.1  GML Objects ........................................................................................................................................ 271 
B.1.2  GML Properties.................................................................................................................................... 271 
B.2  Application Schemas ............................................................................................................................. 271 
B.3  Conformance Classes............................................................................................................................ 271 
B.3.1  Conformance Requirements .............................................................................................................. 271 
Annex C (normative)  GML Schemas ........................................................................................................... 273 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved xvii
 


 


C.1 basicTypes.xsd ................................................................................................................................. 273 
C.2 coordinateOperations.xsd................................................................................................................ 277 
C.3 coordinateReferenceSystems.xsd .................................................................................................. 291 
C.4 coordinateSystems.xsd.................................................................................................................... 299 
C.5 coverage.xsd ..................................................................................................................................... 307 
C.6 dataQuality.xsd ................................................................................................................................. 314 
C.7 datums.xsd ........................................................................................................................................ 316 
C.8 defaultStyle.xsd................................................................................................................................. 324 
C.9 dictionary.xsd .................................................................................................................................... 331 
C.10 direction.xsd...................................................................................................................................... 333 
C.11 dynamicFeature.xsd ......................................................................................................................... 334 
C.12 feature.xsd ......................................................................................................................................... 336 
C.13 geometryAggregates.xsd ................................................................................................................. 339 
C.14 geometryBasic0d1d.xsd................................................................................................................... 346 
C.15 geometryBasic2d.xsd ....................................................................................................................... 355 
C.16 geometryComplexes.xsd.................................................................................................................. 359 
C.17 geometryPrimitives.xsd.................................................................................................................... 362 
C.18 gml.xsd............................................................................................................................................... 389 
C.19 gmlBase.xsd ...................................................................................................................................... 389 
C.20 grids.xsd ............................................................................................................................................ 394 
C.21 measures.xsd .................................................................................................................................... 395 
C.22 observation.xsd................................................................................................................................. 398 
C.23 referenceSystems.xsd ...................................................................................................................... 400 
C.24 temporal.xsd...................................................................................................................................... 404 
C.25 temporalReferenceSystems.xsd ..................................................................................................... 409 
C.26 temporalTopology.xsd...................................................................................................................... 413 
C.27 topology.xsd...................................................................................................................................... 416 
C.28 units.xsd............................................................................................................................................. 423 
C.29 valueObjects.xsd............................................................................................................................... 426 
C.30 xlink.xsd ............................................................................................................................................. 431 
Annex D (informative)  ISO 19100 Profile and Application Schema of GML............................................ 434 
D.1 General Approach ............................................................................................................................. 434 
D.2 Profile of the ISO 19100 Harmonized Model used by GML........................................................... 434 
D.2.1 ISO 19103 Conceptual Schema Language ..................................................................................... 435 
D.2.2 ISO 19107 Spatial Schema (Geometry) ........................................................................................... 436 
D.2.2.1 Overview..................................................................................................................................... 436 
D.2.2.2 Geometry root............................................................................................................................ 437 
D.2.2.3 Geometry primitive.................................................................................................................... 439 
D.2.2.4 Coordinate Geometry................................................................................................................ 445 
D.2.2.5 Geometry aggregates................................................................................................................ 453 
D.2.2.6 Geometry complex .................................................................................................................... 454 
D.2.2.7 Conformance ............................................................................................................................. 456 
D.2.3 ISO 19107 Spatial Schema (Topology)............................................................................................ 457 
D.2.3.1 Overview..................................................................................................................................... 457 
D.2.3.2 Topology root ............................................................................................................................ 457 
D.2.3.3 Topology primitive .................................................................................................................... 459 
D.2.3.4 Topology complex..................................................................................................................... 463 
D.2.3.5 Conformance ............................................................................................................................. 463 
D.2.4 ISO 19108 Temporal Schema........................................................................................................... 464 
D.2.4.1 Overview..................................................................................................................................... 464 
D.2.4.2 Temporal Objects ...................................................................................................................... 465 
D.2.4.3 Concrete Temporal Geometric Primitives............................................................................... 466 
D.2.4.4 Temporal Duration..................................................................................................................... 467 
D.2.4.5 Temporal Position ..................................................................................................................... 468 
D.2.4.6 Temporal Topology ................................................................................................................... 469 
D.2.4.7 Temporal Reference Systems .................................................................................................. 469 
D.2.4.8 Calendars and Clocks ............................................................................................................... 470 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


xviii  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


D.2.4.9 Time Coordinate Systems ........................................................................................................ 471 
D.2.4.10 Temporal Ordinal Reference System ...................................................................................... 471 
D.2.4.11 Conformance ............................................................................................................................. 471 
D.2.5 ISO 19109 Rules for App Schema ................................................................................................... 471 
D.2.6 ISO 19111 Spatial Referencing By Coordinates............................................................................. 472 
D.2.7 ISO 19112 Spatial Referencing By Geographic Identifiers ........................................................... 474 
D.2.8 ISO 19115 Metadata .......................................................................................................................... 475 
D.2.9 ISO 19117 Portrayal .......................................................................................................................... 475 
D.2.9.1 Overview..................................................................................................................................... 475 
D.2.9.2 Portrayal Mechanism from ISO 19117 ..................................................................................... 475 
D.2.9.3 Portrayal Service ....................................................................................................................... 479 
D.2.9.4 Portrayal Catalogue................................................................................................................... 479 
D.2.9.5 PF_PortrayalCatalogue ............................................................................................................. 480 
D.2.9.6 PF_FeaturePortrayal ................................................................................................................. 481 
D.2.9.7 PF_PortrayalRule....................................................................................................................... 481 
D.2.9.8 Portrayal Specification.............................................................................................................. 481 
D.2.9.9 PF_PortrayalSpecification........................................................................................................ 482 
D.2.9.10 PF_PortrayalOperation ............................................................................................................. 482 
D.2.9.11 Portrayal of textual data............................................................................................................ 482 
D.2.9.12 Representation of symbols ...................................................................................................... 482 
D.2.9.13 Tabular Comparison.................................................................................................................. 483 
D.2.9.14 Conformance ............................................................................................................................. 483 
D.2.10 ISO 19123 Coverages........................................................................................................................ 485 
D.3 Extension of the profile of the ISO 19100 Harmonized Model used by GML .............................. 487 
D.3.1 Overview ............................................................................................................................................ 487 
D.3.2 Package basicTypes ..................................................................................................................... 488 
D.3.3 Package gmlBase .......................................................................................................................... 489 
D.3.4 Package dictionary........................................................................................................................ 489 
D.3.5 Package units ................................................................................................................................ 490 
D.3.6 Package measures ........................................................................................................................ 490 
D.3.7 Package geometryBasic0d01....................................................................................................... 492 
D.3.8 Package geometryBasic2d........................................................................................................... 492 
D.3.9 Package geometryPrimitives ....................................................................................................... 493 
D.3.10 Package geometryAggregates..................................................................................................... 494 
D.3.11 Package geometryComplexes ..................................................................................................... 494 
D.3.12 Package topology.......................................................................................................................... 495 
D.3.13 Package direction.......................................................................................................................... 496 
D.3.14 Package valueObjects................................................................................................................... 496 
D.3.15 Package temporal.......................................................................................................................... 498 
D.3.16 Package dynamicFeature ............................................................................................................. 499 
D.3.17 Package feature ............................................................................................................................. 500 
D.3.18 Package observation..................................................................................................................... 500 
D.3.19 Package grids ................................................................................................................................ 500 
D.3.20 Package coverage ......................................................................................................................... 501 
D.3.21 Packages coordinateOperations, coordinateReferenceSystems, 


coordinateSystems, dataQuality, datums, referenceSystems....................................... 501 
D.3.22 Package defaultStyle..................................................................................................................... 501 
Annex E (normative)  UML-to-GML Application Schema Encoding Rules .............................................. 502 
E.1 General concepts .............................................................................................................................. 502 
E.2 Encoding Rules ................................................................................................................................. 502 
E.2.1 General encoding requirements...................................................................................................... 502 
E.2.1.1 Application schema................................................................................................................... 502 
E.2.1.2 Character repertoire and languages........................................................................................ 508 
E.2.1.3 Exchange metadata................................................................................................................... 508 
E.2.1.4 Dataset and object identification ............................................................................................. 508 
E.2.1.5 Update mechanism.................................................................................................................... 508 
E.2.2 Input data structure .......................................................................................................................... 508 
E.2.3 Output data structure ....................................................................................................................... 509 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved xix
 


 


E.2.4 Conversion rules............................................................................................................................... 509 
E.2.4.1 General concepts ...................................................................................................................... 509 
E.2.4.2 UML Packages ........................................................................................................................... 510 
E.2.4.3 UML Classes (general rules) .................................................................................................... 510 
E.2.4.4 UML Classes (basic types) ....................................................................................................... 510 
E.2.4.4 UML Classes (data types)......................................................................................................... 512 
E.2.4.5 UML Classes (feature types) .................................................................................................... 513 
E.2.4.6 UML Classes (object types)...................................................................................................... 513 
E.2.4.7 UML Classes (enumerations) ................................................................................................... 514 
E.2.4.8 UML Classes (code lists) .......................................................................................................... 514 
E.2.4.9 UML Classes (unions) ............................................................................................................... 515 
E.2.4.10 UML Attributes and Association roles .................................................................................... 515 
E.2.4.11 Documentation .......................................................................................................................... 517 
E.2.4.12 Imported Classes from the ISO 19100 Harmonized Model.................................................... 517 
E.3 Example <informative>..................................................................................................................... 519 
Annex F (normative)  GML-to-UML Application Schema Encoding Rules............................................... 522 
F.1 General concepts .............................................................................................................................. 522 
F.2 Encoding Rules ................................................................................................................................. 522 
F.2.1 General encoding requirements...................................................................................................... 522 
F.2.1.1 General remarks ........................................................................................................................ 522 
F.2.1.2 GML schema .............................................................................................................................. 523 
F.2.1.3 Character repertoire and languages........................................................................................ 527 
F.2.1.4 Exchange metadata................................................................................................................... 528 
F.2.1.5 Dataset and object identification ............................................................................................. 528 
F.2.1.6 Update mechanism.................................................................................................................... 528 
F.2.1.7 Input data structure................................................................................................................... 528 
F.2.2 Output data structure ....................................................................................................................... 528 
F.2.3 Conversion rules............................................................................................................................... 528 
F.2.3.1 General concepts ...................................................................................................................... 528 
F.2.3.2 GML Schema Documents ......................................................................................................... 530 
F.2.3.3 GML Object Types ..................................................................................................................... 530 
F.2.3.4 GML Object Types (imported from the GML schemas) ......................................................... 531 
F.2.3.5 Basic Types................................................................................................................................ 531 
F.2.3.6 GML Data Types ........................................................................................................................ 532 
F.2.3.7 Enumerations............................................................................................................................. 532 
F.2.3.8 Code lists.................................................................................................................................... 533 
F.2.3.9 GML properties .......................................................................................................................... 533 
F.2.3.10 Documentation .......................................................................................................................... 533 
Annex G (Informative)  Guidelines for Subsetting GML Schemas............................................................ 534 
G.1 General ............................................................................................................................................... 534 
G.2 depends.xslt ...................................................................................................................................... 535 
G.3 gmlSubset.xslt................................................................................................................................... 540 
G.4 utility.xslt............................................................................................................................................ 543 
 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


xx  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


Foreword 


ISO (the International Organization for Standardization) is a worldwide federation of national 
standards bodies (ISO member bodies). The work of preparing International Standards is 
normally carried out through ISO technical committees. Each member body interested in a 
subject for which a technical committee has been established has the right to be represented 
on that committee. International organizations, governmental and non-governmental, in 
liaison with ISO, also take part in the work. ISO collaborates closely with the International 
Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) on all matters of electrotechnical standardization. 


International Standards are drafted in accordance with the rules given in the ISO/IEC 
Directives, Part 2. 


Attention is drawn to the possibility that some of the elements of this International Standard 
may be the subject of patent rights. Open GIS Consortium Inc. and ISO shall not be held 
responsible for identifying any or all such patent rights. 


International Standard ISO 19136 was prepared by the Technical Committee of the Open GIS 
Consortium and Technical Committee ISO/TC 211, Geographic information/Geomatics. 


This edition of GML supersedes version 3.0.0 (OGC document 02-023r4). 


GML is a living standard, originally developed within the Open GIS Consortium (OGC). This 
ISO/TC 211 Committee Draft is targeted to become GML version 3.1 within OGC. As GML is 
already used in several commercial data and software products worldwide, compatibility of 
this version with previous versions of GML is important. OGC has decided that the best way 
to introduce changes to existing structures within GML is to deprecate elements, types, 
attributes and groups that shall not be used in new applications. These deprecated structures 
will then be removed from GML in a future version  depending on the adoption of these 
changes by the market. 


Member bodies and liaisons are invited to address in their comments the issue whether this 
International Standard should contain the deprecated structures, too, or if they should be 
removed from the standard. In the latter case, ISO 19136 would be a profile of the GML 
Implementation Specification according to the rules of this standard.   


 


 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved xxi
 


 


Introduction 


Geography Markup Language is an XML grammar written in XML Schema for the modelling, 
transport, and storage of geographic information. 


The key concepts used by Geography Markup Language (GML) to model the world are drawn 
from the OpenGIS Abstract Specification and the ISO 19100 series.   


GML provides a variety of kinds of objects for describing geography including features, 
coordinate reference systems, geometry, topology, time, units of measure and generalized 
values.  


A geographic feature is "an abstraction of a real world phenomenon; it is a geographic feature 
if it is associated with a location relative to the Earth.  So a digital representation of the real 
world can be thought of as a set of features. The state of a feature is defined by a set of 
properties, where each property can be thought of as a {name, type, value} triple.   


The number of properties a feature may have, together with their names and types, are 
determined by its type definition.  Geographic features with geometry are those with 
properties that may be geometry-valued. A feature collection is a collection of features that 
can itself be regarded as a feature; as a consequence a feature collection has a feature type 
and thus may have distinct properties of its own, in addition to the features it contains.   


Geographic features in GML include coverages and observations as subtypes. 


A coverage is a sub-type of feature that has a coverage function with a spatial domain and a 
value set range of homogeneous 2 to n dimensional tuples.  A coverage can represent one 
feature or a collection of features to model and make visible spatial relationships between, 
and the spatial distribution of, earth phenomena.   


An observation  models the act of observing, often with a camera, a person or some form of 
instrument (an act of recognizing and noting a fact or occurrence often involving 
measurement with instruments).  An observation is considered to be a GML feature with a 
time at which the observation took place, and with a value for the observation.   


A reference system provides a scale of measurement for assigning values to a location, time 
or other descriptive quantity or quality.   


A coordinate reference system consists of a set of coordinate system axes that is related to 
the earth through a datum that defines the size and shape of the earth.  Geometries in GML 
indicate the coordinate reference system in which their measurements have been made.   
The parent geometry element of a geometric complex or geometric aggregate makes this 
indication for its constituent geometries.   


A temporal reference system provides standard units for measuring time and describing 
temporal length or duration.  Following ISO 8601, the Gregorian calendar with UTC is used in 
GML as the default temporal reference system.   


A Units of Measure (UOM) dictionary provides definitions of numerical measures of physical 
quantities, such as length, temperature, and pressure, and of conversions between UOMs. 







Submitting organizations and Contacts: 
  
John Bobbitt, POSC  
  
David Burggraf, Galdos Systems 
 
Simon Cox, CSIRO  
 
Paul Daisey, U.S. Census Bureau Geography Division 
 
John Herring, Oracle Corporation 
 
Sandra Johnson, MapInfo Corporation 
 
Ron Lake, Galdos Systems 
 
Richard Martell, Galdos Systems 
 
Akifumi Nakai, NTT Data  
 
Clemens Portele, Interactive Instruments 
 
Milan Trninic, Galdos Systems  
 
Paul Watson, Laser-Scan Ltd 
 
Arliss Whiteside, BAE Systems Mission Solutions 
 







COMMITTEE DRAFT ISO/CD 19136  OGC 03-105r1


 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 1 
 


OpenGIS Geography Markup Language (GML) Implementation 
Specification  Version 3.1.0 


1 Scope 


The Geography Markup Language (GML) is an XML encoding in compliance with ISO 19118 for the transport 
and storage of geographic information modelled according to the conceptual modelling framework used in the 
ISO 19100 series and including both the spatial and non-spatial properties of geographic features. 


This specification defines the XML Schema syntax, mechanisms, and conventions that: 


 Provide an open, vendor-neutral framework for the definition of geospatial application schemas and 
objects;  


 Allow profiles that support proper subsets of GML framework descriptive capabilities;  


 Support the description of geospatial application schemas for specialized domains and information 
communities;  


 Enable the creation and maintenance of linked geographic application schemas and datasets;  


 Support the storage and transport of application schemas and data sets;  


 Increase the ability of organizations to share geographic application schemas and the information they 
describe.  


Implementers may decide to store geographic application schemas and information in GML, or they may 
decide to convert from some other storage format on demand and use GML only for schema and data 
transport. 


NOTE The model is conformant with the parts of the Abstract Specification of OGC and the ISO 19100 series which 
are listed in the normative references. For other parts of this specifications no abstract specification was available. 


2 Conformance 


Conformance with this specification shall be checked using all the relevant tests specified in Annex A 
(normative). The framework, concepts, and methodology for testing, and the criteria to be achieved to claim 
conformance are specified in ISO 19105: Geographic information  Conformance and Testing. 


In order to conform to this OpenGIS Implementation Specification, a software implementation shall choose to 
implement: 


a) Any one of the conformance levels specified in Annex B (normative). 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


2  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


3 Normative references 


The following referenced documents are indispensable for the application of this document. For dated 
references, only the edition cited applies. For undated references, the latest edition of the referenced 
document (including any amendments) applies. 


ISO 8601:2000, Data elements and interchange formats  Information interchange Representation of dates 
and times 


ISO/TS 19103:1, Geographic Information  Conceptual Schema Language 


ISO 19105:2000, Geographic information  Conformance and testing 


ISO 19107:2003, Geographic Information  Spatial Schema 


ISO 19108:2002, Geographic Information  Temporal Schema 


ISO 19109:1, Geographic Information  Rules for Application Schemas 


ISO 19115:2003, Geographic Information  Metadata 


ISO 19117:1, Geographic Information  Portrayal 


ISO 19118:1, Geographic Information  Encoding 


ISO 19123:1, Geographic Information  Coverages 


ISO/TS 19139:1, Geographic Information  Metadata  Implementation Specification 


OpenGIS Abstract Specification Topic 0, Overview, OGC document 99-100r1 


OpenGIS Abstract Specification Topic 1, Feature Geometry, OGC document 01-101 


OpenGIS Abstract Specification Topic 2, Spatial referencing by coordinates, OGC document 03-071r1 


OpenGIS Abstract Specification Topic 5, The OpenGIS Feature, OGC document 99-105r2 


OpenGIS Abstract Specification Topic 8, Relations between Features, OGC document 99-108r2 


OpenGIS Abstract Specification Topic 10, Feature Collections, OGC document 99-110 


IETF RFC 2396, Uniform Resource Identifiers (URI): Generic Syntax. (August 1998) 


IETF RFC 2732, Format for Literal IPv6 Addresses in URLs. (December 1999) 


W3C XLink, XML Linking Language (XLink) Version 1.0. W3C Recommendation (27 June 2001) 


W3C XMLName, Namespaces in XML. W3C Recommendation (14 January 1999)  


W3C XMLSchema-1, XML Schema Part 1: Structures. W3C Recommendation (2 May 2001)  


W3C XMLSchema-2, XML Schema Part 2: Datatypes. W3C Recommendation (2 May 2001)  


W3C Xpointer, XML Pointer Language (XPointer) Version 1.0. W3C Working Draft (16 August 2002) 


                                                      


1  To be published. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 3 
 


 


W3C XML Base, XML Base, W3C Recommendation (27 June 2001) 


W3C XML, Extensible Markup Language (XML) 1.0 (Second Edition), W3C Recommendation 6 October 2000 


W3C SVG, Scalable Vector Graphics (SVG) 1.0 Specification. W3C Recommendation (04 September 2001) 


W3C SMIL, Synchronized Multimedia Integration Language (SMIL 2.0). W3C Recommendation (07 August 
2001) 


The Schematron Assertion Language 1.5.  Rick Jelliffe 2002-10-01 


NOTE Schematron is currently undergoing ISO standardization to become ISO/IEC 19757 - DSDL Document 
Schema Definition Language  Part 3: Rule-based validation  Schematron. 


NOTE Due to differences with the current version of ISO 19111 (Geographic Information  Spatial referencing by 
coordinates) this standard is currently not in the list of normative references. See annex D. 


4 Terms and definitions 


4.1 
application schema 
conceptual schema for data required by one or more applications [ISO 19101] 


4.2 
GML application schema 
an XML Schema written according to the GML rules for application schemas and which defines a vocabulary 
of geographic objects for a particular domain of discourse 


4.3 
association 
semantic relationship between two or more classifiers that specifies connections among their instances [ISO 
19103] 


4.4 
attribute <XML> 
an information item in the XML Information Set [Infoset] 


NOTE 1 In this document an attribute is an XML attribute unless otherwise specified. The syntax of an XML attribute is  
Attribute::= Name = AttValue. An attribute typically acts as an XML element modifier (e.g.  <Road gml:id = r1 /> here 
gml:id is an attribute.  


NOTE 2 ISO 19130 defines the term attribute as: property which describes a geometrical, topological, thematic, or 
other characteristic of an entity. This definition is wider than the term attribute as it is used in this International Standard 
and corresponds more to a GML property. 


4.5 
boundary 
set that represents the limit of an entity [ISO 19107] 


4.6 
category 
One of a set of classes in a classification scheme.   


4.7 
child <XML> 
an XML element c that is in the content of another element p, its parent, but is not in the content of any other 
element in the content of p 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


4  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


4.8 
closure 
union of the interior and boundary of a topological or geometric object [ISO 19107] 


4.9 
codelist 
Value domain including a code for each permissible value 


4.10 
codespace 
Rule or authority for a code, name, term or category 


EXAMPLE Examples of a codespace include dictionaries, authorities, codelists, etc.   


4.11 
composite curve 
sequence of curves such that each curve (except the first) starts at the end point of the previous curve in the 
sequence [ISO 19107] 


NOTE A composite curve, as a set of direct positions, has all the properties of a curve. 


4.12 
composite solid 
connected set of solids adjoining one another along shared boundary surfaces [ISO 19107] 


NOTE A composite solid, as a set of direct positions, has all the properties of a solid. 


4.13 
composite surface 
connected set of surfaces adjoining one another along shared boundary curves [ISO 19107] 


NOTE A composite surface, as a set of direct positions, has all the properties of a surface. 


4.14 
control point 
one of a sequence of points defining the position of a curve segment or surface patch  together with 
additional information about the interpolation method 


NOTE The controlPoints of a curve segment are used to control its shape, but are not always on the curve segment 
itself. 


4.15 
coordinate 
one of a sequence of numbers designating the position of a point in n-dimensional space [ISO 19111] 


NOTE In a coordinate reference system, the n numbers shall be qualified by units. 


4.16 
coordinate reference system 
coordinate system that is related to the real world by a datum [ISO 19111] 


4.17 
coordinate system 
set of mathematical rules for specifying how coordinates are to be assigned to points [ISO 19111] 


4.18 
coordinate tuple 
tuple composed of coordinates 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 5 
 


 


4.19 
coverage 
feature that acts as a function to return values from its range for any direct position within its spatiotemporal 
domain [ISO 19123] 


4.20 
curve 
1-dimensional geometric primitive, representing the continuous image of a line 


NOTE The boundary of a curve is the set of points at either end of the curve. If the curve is a cycle, the two ends are 
identical, and the curve (if topologically closed) is considered to not have a boundary. The first point is called the start 
point, and the last is the end point. Connectivity of the curve is guaranteed by the "continuous image of a line" clause. A 
topological theorem states that a continuous image of a connected set is connected. 


4.21 
data type 
specification of a value domain with operations allowed on values in this domain [ISO 19103] 


EXAMPLE Integer, Real, Boolean, String, Date (conversion of a data into a series of codes). 


NOTE Data types include primitive predefined types and user-definable types. 


4.22 
datum 
parameter or set of parameters that serve as a reference or basis for the calculation of other parameters [ISO 
19111] 


NOTE 1 A datum defines the position of the origin, the scale, and the orientation of the axes of a coordinate system. 


NOTE 2 A datum may be a geodetic datum, a vertical datum or an engineering datum. 


4.23 
direct position 
position described by a single set of coordinates within a coordinate reference system [ISO 19107] 


4.24 
domain 
well-defined set [ISO 19103] 


NOTE 1 A mathematical function can be defined on this set, i.e. in a function f:AB A is the domain of the function f.  


NOTE 2 A domain as in domain of discourse refers to a subject or area of interest. 


4.25 
edge 
1-dimensional topological primitive [ISO 19107] 


4.26 
element <XML> 
an information item in the XML information Set 


NOTE From the XML Information Set Specification: Each XML document contains one or more elements, the 
boundaries of which are either delimited by start-tags and end-tags, or, for empty elements, by an empty-element tag. 
Each element has a type, identified by name, sometimes called its "generic identifier" (GI), and may have a set of attribute 
specifications. Each attribute specification has a name and a value. 


4.27 
exterior 
difference between the universe and the closure [ISO 19107] 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


6  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


4.28 
face 
2-dimensional topological primitive [ISO 19107] 


NOTE The geometric realization of a face is a surface. The boundary of a face is the set of directed edges within the 
same topological complex that are associated to the face via the boundary relations. These can be organized as rings 


4.29 
feature 
abstraction of real world phenomena [ISO 19101] 


NOTE A feature may occur as a type or an instance. Feature type or feature instance should be used when only one 
is meant 


4.30 
feature relationship 
association between features [ISO 19103] 


4.31 
function 
rule that associates each element from a domain (source, or domain of the function) to a unique 
element in another domain (target, co-domain, or range) [ISO 19107]4.32 
geodetic datum 
datum describing the relationship of a coordinate system to the Earth [ISO 19111] 


NOTE In most cases, the geodetic datum includes an ellipsoid definition. 


4.33 
geometric object 
spatial object representing a geometric set [ISO 19107] 


4.34 
geometric set 
set of direct positions [ISO 19107] 


4.35 
geometry property <GML> 
Property of a GML feature that describes some aspect of the geometry of the feature.  


NOTE The geometry property name is the role of the geometry in relation to the feature. 


4.36 
grid 
network composed of two or more sets of curves in which the members of each set intersect the members of 
the other sets in an algorithmic way [ISO 19123] 


NOTE The curves partition a space into grid cells. 


4.37 
interior 
set of all direct positions that are on a geometric object but which are not on its boundary [ISO 19107] 


4.38 
line string 
curve composed of straight-line segments 


4.39 
measure <GML> 
A value described using a numeric amount with a scale or using a scalar reference system 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 7 
 


 


NOTE When used as a noun, measure is a synonym for quantity.  


4.40 
measurand 
Phenomenon or property that is subject to observation.   


4.41 
namespace <XML> 
Collection of names, identified by an URI reference which are used in XML documents as element names and 
attribute names [XML] 


4.42 
node 
0-d topological primitive [ISO 19107] 


4.43 
object 
entity with a well defined boundary and identity that encapsulates state and behaviour [ISO 19107] 


NOTE A GML object is an XML element of a type derived from AbstractGMLType. 


4.44 
observable 
Phenomenon or property that is subject to observation 


4.45 
point 
0-dimensional geometric primitive, representing a position [ISO 19107] 


NOTE The boundary of a point is the empty set. 


4.46 
polygon 
a planar surface defined by 1 exterior boundary and 0 or more interior boundaries 


4.47 
property <GML> 
a  child element of a GML object.   


NOTE It corresponds to feature attribute and feature association in ISO 19109.  If a GML property of a feature has 
an xlink:href attribute that references a feature, the property represents a feature association. 


4.48 
quantity 
property ascribed to phenomena, bodies or substances that can be used to specify the size, amount, or extent 
of a particular phenomenon, body or substance [ISO 19126] 


NOTE In GML a quantity is always a value described using a numeric amount with a scale or using a scalar 
reference system.  Quantity is a synonym for measure when the latter is used as a noun.   


4.49 
range 
the set B of a mathematical function (f:AB) is called the range of the function.  


 
4.50 
rectified grid 
grid for which there is an affine transformation between the grid coordinates and the coordinates of an 
external coordinate reference system [ISO 19123] 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


8  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


4.51 
schema 
formal description of a model [ISO 19101] 


NOTE In general, a schema is an abstract representation of an object's characteristics and relationship to other 
objects. An XML schema represents the relationship between the attributes and elements of an XML object (for example, 
a document or a portion of a document) 


4.52 
semantic type 
A category of objects that share some common characteristics and are thus given an identifying type name in 
a particular domain of discourse. 


4.53  
sequence 
finite, ordered collection of related items (objects or values) that may be repeated [ISO 19107] 


4.54 
set 
unordered collection of related items (objects or values) with no repetition [ISO 19107] 


4.55 
spatial object 
object used for representing a spatial characteristic of a feature [ISO 19107] 


4.56 
tag <XML> 
the text in an XML document bounded by angle brackets 


EXAMPLE <Road>.  


NOTE A tag with no forward slash (e.g. <Road> ) is called a start tag (also opening tag), and one with a forward 
slash (e.g. </Road> is called an end tag (also closing tag). 


4.57 
topological object 
spatial object representing spatial characteristics that are invariant under continuous transformations [ISO 
19107] 


4.58 
topology 
A branch of geometry describing the properties of a figure that are unaffected by continous distorition [Collins 
Concise Dictionary] 


NOTE Topology is mostly concerned with identifying the connectivity of networks and the adjacency of surfaces. 


4.59 
tuple 
An ordered list of values 


4.60 
type 
A class in a classification system 


NOTE See also data type. 


4.61 
Uniform Resource Identifier (URI)  
A unique identifier, usually taking the form of a short string or address that is used to identify the location of a 
resource 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 9 
 


 


NOTE The general syntax is <scheme>::<scheme-specific-part>. The hierarchical syntax with a namespace is 
<scheme>://<authority><path>?<query> - see [RFC 2396]. 


5 Conventions 


5.1 Deprecated parts of previous versions of GML 


The verb "deprecate" provides notice that the referenced portion of the specification is being retained for 
backwards compatibility with earlier versions but may be removed from a future version of the specification 
without further notice. 


5.2 Symbols (and abbreviated terms) 


The following symbols and abbreviated terms are used in this document: 


CRS Coordinate Reference System 


CSV Comma Seperated Values 


CT Coordinate Transformation 


DTD Document Type Definition 


EPSG European Petroleum Survey Group 


GIS Geographic Information System 


GML Geography Markup Language 


HTTP Hypertext Transfer Protocol 


IETF Internet Engineering Task Force 


iff if and only if 


ISO International Organization for Standardization 


OGC Open GIS Consortium 


RDF Resource Description Framework 


RFC Request for Comments 


SMIL Synchronized Multimedia Integration Language 


SOAP Simple Object Access Protocol  


SVG Scalable Vector Graphics 


UML Unified Modeling Language 


URL Uniform Resource Locator 


WKT Well-Known Text 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


10  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


WFS Web Feature Service 


XML Extensible Markup Language 


XSLT eXtensible Stylesheet Language  Transformations 


0D Zero Dimensional 


1D One Dimensional 


2D Two Dimensional 


3D Three Dimensional 


5.3 UML Notation 


Many diagrams that appear in this standard are presented using the Unified Modeling Language (UML) static 
structure diagram.  The UML notations used in this standard are described in the diagram below. 


Association between classes


role-1 role-2


Association Name
Class #1 Class #2


Association Cardinality


Class Only one


Class Zero or more


Class Optional (zero or one )


1..* Class One or more


n Class Specific number


Aggregation between classes


Aggregate
Class


Component
Class #1


Component
Class #2


Component
Class #n


.


0..*


0..1


Class Inheritance (subtyping of classes)


Superclass


Subclass #1


..


Subclass #2 Subclass #n


 


Figure 1  UML notation 


In this standard, the following stereotypes of UML classes are used: 


a) <<DataType>> A descriptor of a set of values that lack identity (independent existence and the possibility 
of side effects). A DataType is a class with no operations whose primary purpose is to hold the 
information. 


b) <<CodeList>> is a flexible enumeration that uses string values for expressing a list of potential values. 


c) <<Enumeration>> is a fixed list of valid identifiers of named literal values. Attributes of an enumerated 
type can only take values from this list.  







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 11 
 


 


d) <<Union>> is a list of attributes. The semantics is that only one of the attributes can be present at any 
time. 


In this standard, the following standard data types are used: 


a) CharacterString  A sequence of characters (in general this data type is mapped to string in XML 
Schema) 


b) Integer  An integer number (in general this data type is mapped to integer in XML Schema) 


c) Real  A floating point number (in general this data type is mapped to double in XML Schema) 


d) Boolean  A value specifying TRUE or FALSE (in general this data type is mapped to boolean in XML 
Schema) 


5.4 XML Schema 


The normative parts of the specification use the W3C XML Schema language to describe the grammar of 
conformant GML data instances.  XML Schema is a rich language with many capabilities and subtleties.  
While a reader who is unfamiliar with XML Schema may be able to follow the description in a general fashion, 
this specification is not intended to serve as an introduction to XML Schema.  In order to have a full 
understanding of this specification it is necessary for the reader to have a reasonable knowledge of XML 
Schema.   


6 Overview of GML Schemas 


6.1 Review of GML version 2  XML for Simple Features 


The previous major release of GML (version 2.x) was concerned with what the OGC calls simple features: 
features whose geometric properties are restricted to 'simple' geometries for which coordinates are defined in 
two dimensions and the delineation of a curve is subject to linear interpolation.  These simple features in GML 
could be used to represent real-world phenomena.  The task to which a digital representation will ultimately be 
put guides the classification of real world phenomena, which in turn determines the feature types that need to 
be defined.   


For example, a city could be represented as a feature collection where the individual features represent such 
things as rivers, roads and colleges.  Each of these feature types would have named, typed properties.  The 
River feature type might have a property called name whose value shall be of the type 'string'.  It is common 
practice to refer to the typed property; thus the River feature type is said to have a string property called 
name. Similarly, the Road feature type might have a string property called classification and an integer 
property called number. Properties with simple types (e.g. integer, string, float, boolean) are collectively 
referred to as simple properties. 


The features required to represent a city might have geometry-valued properties as well as simple properties. 
Just like other properties, geometric properties shall be named. So the River feature type might have a 
geometric property called centerLineOf and the Road feature type might have a geometric property called 
linearGeometry.  Just as it is common to have multiple simple properties defined on a single feature type, so 
too a feature type may have multiple geometric properties; the College feature type might have both a point 
property called location and a polygon property called campus. 


6.2 GML version 3  more than Simple Features, plus ISO conformance 


This version of GML addresses the following needs that were not addressed or adequately met by version 2: 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


12  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 represent geospatial phenomena in addition to simple 2D linear features, including features with 
complex, non-linear, 3D geometry, features with 2D topology, features with temporal properties, 
dynamic features, coverages, and observations; 


 provide more explicit support for properties of features and other objects whose value is complex; 


 represent spatial and temporal reference systems, units of measure and standards information; 


 use reference system, units and standards information in the representation of geospatial 
phenomena, observations, and values; 


 represent default styles for feature and coverage visualization; 


 conform with standards from the ISO 19100 series. 


The expansion of GML to meet these needs is reflected in base schemas for GML version 3 that are over 
eight times as large as the base schemas for GML version 2.  However, few applications will use all of the 
definitions added to GML version 3.  Implementers may use a selective subset of the GML version 3 schemas 
sufficient to support the definitions in their application schemas.  Methods for modular use of GML are 
discussed in clause 20; a schema subsetting tool is provided in Annex G. 


6.3 Backward compatibility 


GML version 3.1.0 maintains backward compatibility for GML version 3.0.0 and 2.1.2 instance documents by 
preserving, but deprecating, some schema components that have been replaced by different constructs in the 
current version.  GML version 2.1.2 and version 3.0.0 application schemas will in most cases require only 
minor changes to upgrade to GML version 3.1.0, removing the use of such deprecated schema components.   


Deprecated GML schema components may be eliminated without notice from a future GML version. 


Deprecated GML schema components are written in italics. 


6.4 GML 3 Application Schemas 


Designers of GML Application schemas may extend or restrict the types defined in the GML base schemas to 
define appropriate types for an application domain.  They may also use non-abstract elements and attributes 
from the GML base schemas as-is in an application schema if no changes are required.  GML Application 
schemas may be constructed by hand using a text editor or specialized XML/Schema editor, in effect using 
XML/Schema as a conceptual schema language.  GML Application schemas may also be constructed as part 
of a model driven process by automated translation to XML/Schema from conceptual models defined in other 
conceptual schema languages such as UML. In both cases, conformance with the requirements of this 
specification requires  application schema use of all of the applicable GML base schema constructs, directly or 
by specialization, application schema validity according to the rules for XML/Schema, and application instance 
document data conformance to the application schema definitions verification by a validating XML parser.  
How the GML application schemas were produced is irrelevant for conformance to the requirements of this 
specification. 


6.5 How GML 3 components are factored into schema documents 


GML defines the various entities such as features, geometries, topologies etc. through a hierarchy of GML 
objects as shown in the UML diagram in Figure 2. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 13 
 


 


Figure 2   GML Class Hierarchy 


The items in Figure 2 with a preceding underscore (e.g. Feature) can be viewed as representative object 
instances of the class.  The element gml:_Feature, for example, is to be interpreted as any GML feature. 


The normative schemas of GML are organized in this specification around these GML object types. 


Clause 7.2 describes the Xlink schema. This schema is an OGC implementation of the XLink specification 
using XML Schema.  It may be replaced in some future release by an equivalent schema from the W3C. 


Clause 7.3 defines the GML representation of some basic data types that are used in different GML Schemas. 
Most of these types are simple types or simple content types. 


Clause 7.5 describes the schema gmlBase.xsd.  This defines the root object (gml;_Object), the root of the 
GML class hierarchy (gml:_GML) and the root for MetaData property packages (gml:_MetaData). 


Clause 8 describes the feature schema which defines gml:_Feature and some derived components. 


Clauses 9, 10 and 11 describe the geometry schemas that define gml:_Geometry and some derived 
components. 


Clause 12 describes the Coordinate Reference System schemas the define the sub-types of 
gml:_ReferenceSystem, and the elements and types required to construct specific Coordinate Reference 
Systems. 


Clause 13 describes the schemas for Topology which define gml:_Topology and some derived components. 


Clause 14 describes the schemas for temporal constructs and for dynamic features. 


Clause 15 describes the schemas for definitions and dictionaries 


gml:_Object


gml:_GML


gml:_Geometry


gml:_Topology


gml:_Feature


gml:_Coverage


gml:Observation


gml:Definition


gml:_Value


gml:_TimeObject gml:_Style


gml:_ReferenceSystem


gml:_CRS


gml:_TimeReferenceSystem


gml:UnitDefinition







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


14  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


Clause 16 describes the schemas for the construction of units of measure, measures and value objects.  


Clause 17 describes the schemas for the description of Direction. 


Clause 18 describes the schemas for Observations. 


Clause 19.2 describes the schemas for grid geometries.   


Clause 19.3 describes the schemas for coverages.  This describes gml:_Coverage and some derived 
components. 


Clause 20 describes the schemas for the graphical default styling of GML features, geometries and 
topologies. 


6.6 GML schemas to import into your GML 3 Application Schema 


Most applications will make use of only a subset of the schemas described in this specification.  Schema 
dependencies are discussed in greater detail in Clause 21. As a starting point, consider the following; 


a) If you are modelling geographic features you will need the feature.xsd.  


b) If your features have properties which make use of units of measure you will need to import one of the 
basicTypes.xsd, measure.xsd and valueObjects.xsd, but you will not need the units.xsd schema 
unless you are defining units of measure such as appear in a units of measure dictionary. 


c) If you need only simple 1D or 2D geometries you need only the geometryBasic0d1d and 
geometryBasic2d schemas.  You need the additional geometry schemas only if you require support 
for complex, 3D or non-linear geometry types. This is discussed in greater detail in Clauses 9, 10 and 
11. 


d) You only need topology.xsd if your features have topology properties. 


e) You need the Coordinate Reference System schemas only if you are constructing Coordinate 
Reference System dictionary entries and those for supporting components (e.g. Prime Meridians, 
Geodetic Datums etc.). 


f) You need the temporal schemas only if you are concerned with time dependent feature properties or 
dynamic features. 


g) You need the coverage schemas only if you are constructing coverages (e.g. remotely sensed 
images, aerial photographs, soil distribution, digital elevation models). 


h) You need the observation schema only if you are concerned with modelling acts of observation such 
as taking photographs or making measurements. In the latter case you will also likely use the 
valueObjects.xsd and measure.xsd schemas. 


i) You need direction schema only to describe direction constructs such as compass bearings.  The 
direction schema is included by the observation.xsd schema in order to support directed observations. 


j) You need the defaultStyle.xsd only if you are concerned with the description of graphical styles for 
features, geometries and topologies. 


k) The Metadata element in gmlBase.xsd is used to define packages of metadata properties that can be 
attached to any resource including GML features, geometries, and topologies. 


In many applications you will only need to import the feature.xsd as this transitively imports the simple 
geometry schemas and gmlBase.xsd.  For a thorough discussion of schema dependencies and modularity 
see Clause 21. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 15 
 


 


7 GML schemas  general rules and base schemas  


7.1 Introduction, namespaces, versioning 


This clause describes the normative GML schema documents and explains their contents, structure and 
dependencies.   


The components described in the xlinks.xsd schema document are in the http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink 
namespace, for which the prefix xlink is normally used.   


All the other schema documents describe components in the http://www.opengis.net/gml namespace, for 
which the prefix gml is normally used. 


Each schema document in GML carries a version attribute as defined in the XML Schema Recommendation.  
The format of the version attribute string is x.y.z where x denotes the major version number, y denotes a 
minor version number and z denotes a bug fix release for that document. The current version is 3.1.0. 


7.2 Xlinks  Object Associations and Remote Properties 


The normative xlink specification is available from W3C [xlink].  A schema document xlinks.xsd is provided as 
part of GML, pending the availability of a normative W3C XML Schema implementation.   


Xlink components are used in GML to implement associations between objects by reference.  GML property 
elements (see clause 7.5.3) may carry xlink attributes, which support the encoding of an association 
relationship by reference, the name of the property element denoting the target role in the association.  The 
most important xlink component is: 


href: Identifier of the resource which is the target of the association, given as a URI 


The appearance of an xlink:href on a GML property indicates that the value of the property is to be found by 
traversing the link, that is the value is pointed to by the value of the xlink:href attribute.  Following the 
terminology of Xlink, GML properties with xlink:href attributes are sometimes referred to as remote properties. 


The other xlink components are used to indicate additional semantics of the relationship.  The most useful of 
these are 


role: description of the nature of the target resource, given as a URI 


arcrole: description of the role or purpose of the target resource in relation to the present resource, given as 
a URI 


title: description of the association or the target resource, given as text.   


For complete definitions of these and other xlink components, including their use in extended xlink association 
maps, refer to the xlink specification [xlink]. 


In the GML core schemas (those defined in Clauses 7 to 20 of this international standard), simple xlinks are 
used exclusively to denote object, feature or geometry associations and to denote remotely referenced 
property values. 


7.3 Basic Types  


7.3.1 Overview 


W3C XML Schema provides a set of built-in simple types which define methods for representing values as 
literals without internal markup.  These are described in Part 2 of the W3C XML Schema recommendation.  
Because GML is an XML encoding in which instances are described using XML Schema, these simple types 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


16  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


are used as far as possible and practical for the representation of data types.  W3C XML Schema also 
provides methods for defining (i) new simple types by restriction and combination of the built-in types, and (ii) 
complex types, with simple content, but which also have XML attributes.  In many places where a suitable 
built-in simple type is not available, simple content types derived using the XML Schema mechanisms are 
used for the representation of data types in GML.   


A set of these simple content types that are required by several GML components are defined in the 
basicTypes schema document, as well as some elements based on them,.  These are primarily based around 
components needed to record amounts, counts, flags and terms, together with support for exceptions or null 
values.  The basic types and elements described in the basicTypes schema listed in Annex C. The schema is 
identified by the following location-independent name (using URN syntax): 


urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-xsd:basicTypes:v3.1.0 
 


7.3.2 Convenience types 


7.3.2.1 gml:NullType 


gml:NullType defines a content model that allows recording of a typed exception.   


  <simpleType name="NullEnumeration"> 
    <restriction base="string"> 
      <enumeration value="inapplicable"/> 
      <enumeration value="missing"/> 
      <enumeration value="template"/> 
      <enumeration value="unknown"/> 
      <enumeration value="withheld"/> 
    </restriction> 
  </simpleType> 
 
  <simpleType name="NullType"> 
    <union memberTypes="gml:NullEnumeration anyURI"/> 
  </simpleType> 
 
NullType is a union of the following enumerated values: 


inapplicable there is no value 


missing the correct value is not readily available to the sender of this data.  Furthermore, a correct 
value may not exist 


template the value will be available later 


unknown the correct value is not known to, and not computable by, the sender of this data. However, a 
correct value probably exists 


withheld the value is not divulged 


and  


anyURI which should refer to a resource which describes the reason for the value not being available 


A particular community may choose to assign more detailed semantics to the standard values provided.  
Alternatively, the URI method enables a specific or more complete explanation for the absence of a value to 
be provided elsewhere and indicated by-reference in an instance document.    


NullType is used as a member of a union in a number of simpleContent types defined below (clauses 7.3.2.3, 
7.3.3.3, 7.3.4.3) where it is necessary to permit a value from the NullType union as an alternative to the 
primary type.   







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 17 
 


 


7.3.2.2 gml:Null 


A convenience element gml:Null is declared as follows:   


  <element name="Null" type="gml:NullType"/> 
 
This element might appear in data instance documents as follows: 


<gml:Null>withheld</gml:Null> 
 
<gml:Null>http://my.big.org/explanations/theDogAteIt</gml:Null> 
 
The first example uses one of the built-in values for Null.  The second example contains a reference to an 
explanation available elsewhere, identified by a URI.   


The purpose in providing the gml:Null element is as follows.  In order to construct a content model where a 
value may be omitted, the cardinality constraint expressed in XML Schema using the construction 
minOccurs=0 might be used.  However, this approach carries the risk that the reason for the value not 
being present may be misinterpreted.  As an alternative the element gml:Null may be included as a member of 
a <choice> group, alongside an element of the datatype of a normal value.  For example, the content model 
described by the schema fragment 


<element name="footprint"> 
  <complexType> 
      <choice> 
        <element ref="gml:Envelope"/> 
        <element ref="gml:Null"/> 
      </choice> 
  </complexType> 
</element> 
 
allows either of the following data instances to be valid: 


  <footprint> 
    <gml:Envelope>  </gml:Envelope> 
  </footprint> 
 
  <footprint> 
    <gml:Null>inapplicable</gml:Null> 
  </footprint> 
 
This allows the hypothetical element footprint to appear in an instance document, optionally containing an 
explicit marker indicate why it has no value, instead of having semantics inferred from the absence of a value.   


The <choice> group is a useful content model structure available in the W3C XML Schema language, which 
shall be synthesised using more complex notation in some other conceptual schema languages (e.g. using a 
<<union>> sterotype, or an OCL constraint, in UML).  It is an efficient and useful structuring component 
provided by this implementation language, so is used widely in GML as illustrated here and elsewhere. 


7.3.2.3 gml:SignType 


This is a convenience type with values + (plus) and - (minus).   


  <simpleType name="SignType"> 
    <restriction base="string"> 
      <enumeration value="-"/> 
      <enumeration value="+"/> 
    </restriction> 
  </simpleType> 
 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


18  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


Elements or attributes of this type are used in various places, e.g. to indicate the direction of topological 
objects with "+" for forwards, or "-" for backwards. 


7.3.3 Simple content 


7.3.3.1 gml:booleanOrNull, gml:doubleOrNull, gml:integerOrNull, gml:NameOrNull, gml:stringOrNull 


A set of simple types provide extensions to the XML Schema built-in types boolean, double, integer, Name 
and string, to allow a choice of either the built-in simple type or a null. They are constructed as follows: 


  <simpleType name="booleanOrNull"> 
    <union memberTypes="gml:NullEnumeration boolean anyURI"/> 
  </simpleType> 
 
  <simpleType name="doubleOrNull"> 
    <union memberTypes="gml:NullEnumeration double anyURI"/> 
  </simpleType> 
 
  <simpleType name="integerOrNull"> 
    <union memberTypes="gml:NullEnumeration integer anyURI"/> 
  </simpleType> 
 
  <simpleType name="NameOrNull"> 
    <union memberTypes="gml:NullEnumeration Name anyURI"/> 
  </simpleType> 
 
  <simpleType name="stringOrNull"> 
    <union memberTypes="gml:NullEnumeration string anyURI"/> 
  </simpleType> 
 
These are defined as unions of the respective XML Schema built-in simple type and the GML Nulltype.  An 
element which uses one of these types may have content which is either boolean/string/Name/double/integer 
or a value from the Nulltype. 


7.3.3.2 gml:CodeType 


This is a generalized type to be used for a term, keyword or name.   


  <complexType name="CodeType"> 
    <simpleContent> 
      <extension base="string"> 
        <attribute name="codeSpace" type="anyURI" use="optional"/> 
      </extension> 
    </simpleContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
It adds a XML attribute codeSpace to a term, where the value of the codeSpace attribute (if present) should 
indicate a dictionary, thesaurus, classification scheme, authority, or pattern for the term.  As an example, the 
gmlBase schema contains an element declaration using this type (clause 7.5.6.3): 


  <element name="name" type="gml:CodeType"/> 
 
so a corresponding element might appear in an instance document as follows : 


<gml:name codeSpace = http://www.ukusa.gov/placenames>St Paul</gml:name> 
 
In this example St Paul is asserted to be a meaningful name according to http://www.ukusa.gov/placenames.  
Note that in all cases the rules for the values, including such things as uniqueness constraints, are set by the 
authority responsible for the codeSpace.   







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 19 
 


 


7.3.3.3 gml:MeasureType 


A MeasureType supports recording Type is an amount encoded as a double, together with a units of measure 
indicated by a uom attribute.  The value of uom (Units Of Measure) attribute is a reference to a reference 
system for the amount, often a ratio or interval scale. 


  <complexType name="MeasureType"> 
    <simpleContent> 
      <extension base="double"> 
        <attribute name="uom" type="anyURI" use="required"/> 
      </extension> 
    </simpleContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
The value of uom (Units Of Measure) attribute is a reference to a reference system for the amount, often a 
ratio or interval scale. 


As an example, an application schema may contain an element declaration using this type 


  <element name = height  type = gml:MeasureType/> 
 
Aso corresponding n elements of this type might appear in an data instance document as follows : 


<height uom=http://www.iso.org/iso/en//units/m">1.4224</height>  
<height uom=http://www.equestrian.org/units/hands">14</height>  
<height uom=http://www.iso.org/iso/en//units/m">1.4224</height>  
 
where the resource identified by the value of the uom attribute defines the unit of measure.  GML components 
for this are defined in clause 16.2. 


7.3.4 Lists 


7.3.4.1 gml:booleanList, gml:doubleList, gml:integerList, gml:NameList, gml:NCNameList, 
gml:QNameList, gml:booleanOrNullList, gml:NameOrNullList, gml:doubleOrNullList, 
gml:integerOrNullList 


A set of types for lists of simple values are constructed according to the following patterns as follows: 


  <simpleType name="booleanList"> 
    <list itemType="boolean"/> 
  </simpleType> 
 
  <simpleType name=" doubleList"> 
    <list itemType="double"/> 
  </simpleType> 
 
  <simpleType name="integerList"> 
    <list itemType="integer"/> 
  </simpleType> 
 
  <simpleType name="NameList"> 
    <list itemType="Name"/> 
  </simpleType> 
 
  <simpleType name="NCNameList"> 
    <list itemType="NCName"/> 
  </simpleType> 
 
  <simpleType name="QNameList"> 
    <list itemType="QName"/> 
  </simpleType> 
 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


20  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


  <simpleType name="booleanOrNullList"> 
    <list itemType="gml:booleanOrNull"/> 
  </simpleType> 
 
  <simpleType name="NameOrNullList"> 
    <list itemType="gml:NameOrNull"/> 
  </simpleType> 
 
  <simpleType name="doubleOrNullList"> 
    <list itemType="gml:doubleOrNull"/> 
  </simpleType> 
 
  <simpleType name="integerOrNullList"> 
    <list itemType="gml:integerOrNull"/> 
  </simpleType> 
 
These types are defined as a list of values of the respective XML Schema built-in simple types, or of the Union 
types listed above.  The *OrNullList types support null values interspersed within a list. 


An element which uses one of these types will contain a whitespace-separated list of members of the relevant 
type (see http://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#atomic-vs-list for more details of the XML list structure).   


NOTE None of list types defined here use an XML Schema string as an item.  The reason for this is that a string may 
include embedded spaces, linefeeds, etc (http://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#string).  Since whitespace acts as the item 
separator in a list instance, there would be ambiguity in identifying items that potentially contain whitespace.  On the other 
hand, an instance of the XML Schema Name type may not contain whitespace (http://www.w3.org/TR/2000/WD-xml-2e-
20000814#NT-Name), so this may be used safely in a list context.  The corollary of this is that if a term may contain 
whitespace, then such a term may not occur in a list instance.    


7.3.4.2 gml:CodeListType, gml:CodeOrNullListType 


These two types provide for lists of terms.  The schema definitions are as follows: 


  <complexType name="CodeListType"> 
    <simpleContent> 
      <extension base="gml:NameList"> 
        <attribute name="codeSpace" type="anyURI" use="optional"/> 
      </extension> 
    </simpleContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
  <complexType name="CodeOrNullListType"> 
    <simpleContent> 
      <extension base="gml:NameOrNullList"> 
        <attribute name="codeSpace" type="anyURI" use="optional"/> 
      </extension> 
    </simpleContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
The values in an instance element of CodeListType should all be valid according to the rules of the dictionary, 
classification scheme, or authority identified by the value of its codeSpace attribute (e.g. list of localities, soil 
types, rock types, animal species etc.).  As an example, an application schema may contain an element 
declaration using this type 


  <element name = species  type = gml:CodeListType/> 
 
so a corresponding element might appear in an instance document as follows : 


<species codeSpace=http://my.big.org/florelegium>dryandra banksia hardenbergia lavendar</species> 
 
where the listed items are from http://my.big.org/florelegium which is a (hypothetical) list of flowers.   







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 21 
 


 


An instance element of CodeOrNullListType may also include embedded values from NullType.  It is intended 
to be used in situations where a term or classification is expected, but the value may be absent for some 
reason.   


7.3.4.3 gml:MeasureListType, gml:MeasureOrNullListType 


These two types provide for lists of quantities.  The schema definitions are as follows: 


  <complexType name="MeasureListType"> 
    <simpleContent> 
      <extension base="gml:doubleList"> 
        <attribute name="uom" type="anyURI" use="required"/> 
      </extension> 
    </simpleContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
  <complexType name="MeasureOrNullListType"> 
    <simpleContent> 
      <extension base="gml:doubleOrNullList"> 
        <attribute name="uom" type="anyURI" use="required"/> 
      </extension> 
    </simpleContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
As an example, an application schema may contain element declarations using these types 


  <element name = heights  type = gml:MeasureListType/> 
  <element name = weights  type = gml:MeasureOrNullListType/> 
 
so corresponding elements might appear in an instance document as follows: 


<heights uom= http://www.iso.org/iso/en//units/m>1.76 1.85 1.56 1.98</heights> 
<weights uom= http://www.iso.org/iso/en//units/kg>67.0 73.4 withheld 85.1</weights> 
 
In both examples all of the values in the list are described using the same scale.  In the second example a null 
value appears where a measure is normally expected, but the value may be absent for some reason.   


7.4 GML model and syntax 


7.4.1 GML instance documents 


GML uses an explicit syntax to instantiate a GML application schema conformant with the General Feature 
Model defined in ISO 19109 in an XML document.   


A Feature (ISO 19109) is encoded as an XML element with the name of the feature type. Other identifiable 
objects are encoded as XML elements with the name of the object type.   


Each feature attribute (ISO 19109) and feature association role (ISO 19109) is a property of a feature. Feature 
properties are encoded in an XML element.  


NOTE The term "attribute" in XML refers to a specific syntactic component in XML documents, so to avoid confusion 
when describing the XML encoding, GML follows RDF (W3C, 1999) terminology and uses the term property rather than 
attribute or association role. The General Feature Model (ISO 19109) also uses the term "property" as a generalization of 
attributes, association roles and operations. 


Furthermore, the property semantics, which is indicated by the name of the element representing the property, 
and the property value, which is given by the content of the property element, are distinguished. A property 
element may contain its value as content encoded inline, or reference its value with a simple XLink.  The value 
of a property may be simple, or it may be a feature or other complex object.  When recorded inline, the value 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


22  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


of a simple property is recorded as a literal value with no embedded markup (text), while if the value is 
complex it appears as a subtree using XML markup (i.e. an XML element with possible sub-structure).   


NOTE The GML model has a relatively straightforward representation using the UML profile used in the ISO 19100 
series (defined in ISO 19103).  This is described in detail in Annex D and Annex E, but can be summarised approximately 
and briefly as follows.  


Features are represented  


 in UML by objects, where the name of the feature type is used as the name of the object class  


 in GML instances by XML elements, where the name of the feature type is used as the name of the element  


Feature properties are represented  


 in UML by association roles with feature type classes, and attributes of feature type classes, where the property 
semantics are given by the association role name or attribute name 


 in GML instances by sub-elements (known as property elements) of feature elements, where the property 
semantics are given by the property element name 


The property value has a type indicated  


 in UML by the class of the association target, or by the datatype of the attribute 


 in GML, in the case of properties with complex values, by the name of the object element contained within the 
property element 


The result is a layered XML document, in which XML elements corresponding to features, objects or values 
occur interleaved with XML elements corresponding to the properties that relate them.  The function of a 
feature, object or value in context can always be determined by inspecting the name of the property element 
which directly contains it, or which carries the reference to it.   


7.4.2 Lexical conventions 


There are several lexical conventions used in GML to assist in human comprehension of GML instances and 
schemas: 


 objects are instantiated as XML elements with a conceptually meaningful name in UpperCamelCase; 


 properties are instantiated as XML elements whose name is in lowerCamelCase; 


 abstract elements have an underscore prepended to their _name; 


 the names of XML Schema complex types are in UpperCamelCase ending in the word Type; 


 abstract XML Schema types have the word Abstract prepended.   


7.4.3 XML schema definition of GML languages 


GML schema documents are W3C XML Schemas that define types and declare  


 XML elements to encode GML objects with identity,  


 XML elements to encode GML properties of those objects, and  


 XML attributes qualifying those properties.   







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 23 
 


 


A GML object is an XML element of a type derived directly or indirectly from AbstractGMLType. From this 
derivation, a GML object may have a gml:id attribute. 


A GML property may not be derived from AbstractGMLType, may not have a gml:id attribute, or any other 
attribute of XML type ID.  


An element is a GML property if and only if it is a child element of a GML object.   


No GML object may appear as the immediate child of a GML object.   


Consequently, no element may be both a GML object and a GML property. 


NOTE In this version of GML, the use of additional XML attributes in a GML application schema is discouraged. 


7.5 gmlBase schema  


The types and elements used to establish the GML model and syntax are described in the schema listed in 
Annex C. The schema is identified by the following location-independent name (using URN syntax): 


urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-xsd:gmlBase:v3.1.0 
 


7.5.1 Goals of base schema 


The schema document gmlBase.xsd defines components that establish the GML Model and Syntax: in 
particular 


 a root XML type from which XML types for all GML objects should be derived, 


 a pattern and components for GML properties, 


 patterns for collections and arrays, and components for generic collections and arrays, 


 components for associating metadata with GML objects, 


 components for constructing definitions and dictionaries. 


7.5.2 Base objects 


7.5.2.1 gml:_Object 


An abstract convenience element gml:_Object is declared as follows:  


<element name="_Object" abstract="true"> 
 
This element has no type defined, and is therefore implicitly an XML Schema anyType.  It is used as the 
head of an XML Schema substitution group which unifies complexContent and certain simpleContent 
elements used for datatypes in GML, including the gml:_GML substitution group.   


NOTE gml:_Object is defined primarily to act as a variable in certain aggregate patterns where it is necessary to 
allow either elements in the gml:_GML substitution group, or certain complexContent or simpleContent elements to be 
valid in an instance.   


A GML dataset (also called a data instance or data document) is a GML object. This GML object can in turn 
be a collection of GML objects  


7.5.2.2 gml:_GML, gml:AbstractGMLType 


The most basic components for constructing identifiable GML objects are described in the schema as follows: 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


24  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


<element name="_GML" type="gml:AbstractGMLType" abstract="true" substitutionGroup="gml:_Object"/> 
 
<complexType name="AbstractGMLType" abstract="true"> 


<sequence> 
<element ref="gml:metaDataProperty" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
<element ref="gml:description" minOccurs="0"/> 
<element ref="gml:name" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 


</sequence> 
<attribute ref="gml:id" use="optional"/> 


</complexType> 
 
The abstract element gml:_GML is any GML object having identity.   It acts as the head of an XML Schema 
substitution group, which may include any element which is a GML feature, or other object, with identity.  This 
is used as a variable in content models in GML core and application schemas.  It is effectively an abstract 
superclass for all GML objects.  


The pairing of gml:_GML and gml:AbstractGMLType shows a basic pattern used in the GML schemas, 
whereby each GML object type is represented by a global element declaration, which has an associated XML 
Schema type definition.  The name of an element representing a GML Object indicates the conceptual 
meaning of the object.  Generic element names in GML include gml:_Object, gml:_GML, gml:_Feature, 
gml:_Value, gml:_Coverage, gml:_Topology and gml:_CRS.  These other generic elements representing 
objects are defined elsewhere in this specification.   


The child XML elements and XML attributes of a GML object are properties of that object. Thus an object 
represented by an gml:_GML element has four properties: metaDataProperty, description, name and id.  
These are described in clause 7.5.5. 


7.5.3 GML properties 


The term property is used to refer to a GML property, which is any characteristic of a GML object.  An 
element in a GML document or data stream is a GML property if and only if it is a child element of a GML 
object element.  The meaning of each property is indicated by the name of the element that instantiates it.  


GML Objects may have an unlimited number of properties, in addition to those inherited from 
gml:AbstractGMLType.  A property may be defined to have either simple or complex content.   A property with 
simple content has an XML Schema simpleContent type, as illustrated by the case of the standard property 
elements gml:description and gml:name.  A property with complex content has an XML Schema 
complexContent type, as in the case of the standard property element gml:member.    


Property elements may use two modes:   


o by value: the value of the property is represented directly, as the content of the property element. This 
method is used by the standard property gml:name and may be used for gml:description (see clause 
7.5.6).   


o by reference: the value of the property is available elsewhere, and is identified by the value of an 
xlink:href attribute on the property element. This alternative method may be used for the standard 
property gml:description  (see clause 7.5.6).  


7.5.3.1 gml:_association, gml:AssociationType 


To support the encoding of properties that may have complex content, a basic pattern for property elements is 
provided in the schema as follows:   


  <element name="_association" type="gml:AssociationType" abstract="true"/> 
 
  <complexType name="AssociationType"> 
    <sequence> 
      <element ref="gml:_Object" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 25 
 


 


  </complexType> 
 
NOTE The declaration of gml:_association and its accompanying type definition is provided for convenience, to act 
as a template or pattern for the construction of property elements in application schemas.  There is no requirement for 
specific properties to use XML Schema type derivation from gml:AssocationType to create properties in a conformant 
GML application schema.  This contrasts with the requirement that the content model for all identifiable objects shall derive 
from gml:AbstractGMLType, and for all features from gml:AbstractFeatureType  


7.5.3.2 gml:AssociationAttributeGroup 


XLink components are the standard method to support hypertext referencing in XML.  An XML Schema 
attribute group, gml:AssociationAttributeGroup, is provided to support the use of Xlinks as the method for 
indicating the value of a property by reference in a uniform manner in GML.  This attribute group is defined in 
the schema as follows: 


In xlinks.xsd (see clause 7.2): 


  <attributeGroup name="simpleLink"> 
    <attribute name="type" type="string" fixed="simple" form="qualified"/> 
    <attribute ref="xlink:href" use="optional"/> 
    <attribute ref="xlink:role" use="optional"/> 
    <attribute ref="xlink:arcrole" use="optional"/> 
    <attribute ref="xlink:title" use="optional"/> 
    <attribute ref="xlink:show" use="optional"/> 
    <attribute ref="xlink:actuate" use="optional"/> 
  </attributeGroup> 
 
in gmlBase.xsd (see clause 7.5): 


  <attributeGroup name="AssociationAttributeGroup"> 
    <attributeGroup ref="xlink:simpleLink"/> 
    <attribute ref="gml:remoteSchema" use="optional"/> 
  </attributeGroup> 
 
The value of a GML property that carries an xlink:href attribute is the resource returned by traversing the link.   


In addition to the simpleLink components, the additional attribute remoteSchema, is provided to indicate a 
schema which constrains the description of the remote resource referenced by the xlink.  Note that all 
components in the attribute group are optional.   


7.5.4 By value or by reference? 


The gml:_Object element in the content model for properties is optional.  In combination with the component 
cardinalities in AssociationAttributeGroup this means that an element of this type may have a content element 
(in the substitution group headed by gml:_Object) or xlink attributes.  GML property elements which follow this 
pattern can be used to attach values either by value or by reference.   


NOTE When used in the by value form, a GML property element corresponds with an implementation of a UML 
composition association.  When used in the by reference form, a GML property element corresponds with an 
implementation of a UML aggregation association.  The standard form, which supports either style, may be compared with 
the UML untyped association.  The name of the property element corresponds to the rolename on the UML association, or 
to a UML attribute name.  The name of the value element (gml:Point in the example here) corresponds to the class of the 
target of the association.   


EXAMPLE A utility property provided for GML Features (described below in Clause 8.2.3) is position.  This may be 
used to indicate a spatial location by-value as follows: 


<gml:position> 
  <gml:Point gml:id="point96" srsName="urn:EPSG:geographicCRS:62836405"> 
    <gml:pos>-31.936 115.834</gml:pos> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


26  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


  </gml:Point> 
</gml:position> 
 
which uses the gml:Point object as defined in the GML geometry schemas (described in Clause 9.2).  The same property 
element may be used to indicate a location by reference as follows:   


<gml:position xlink:href="http://my.big.org/locations/point53"/> 
 
where http://my.big.org/location/point53 identifies a point supplied by the service indicated.  


However, a property element following this pattern may have no content or attributes, or it may have both 
content and attributes, and still be XML Schema-valid.  It is not possible to constrain the co-occurrence of 
content or attributes, so we cannot use W3C XML Schema to restrict a property to be exclusively by-value or 
by-reference.   


7.5.4.1 gml:_strictAssociation 


The constraint may be described precisely using an auxiliary constraint language Schematron [schematron].  
The abstract, global elements _association and  _strictAssociation both use AssociationType, but the 
following schema fragments shows how an element declaration may include a Schematron constraint to limit 
the property to act in either by-value or by-reference mode, but not both.   


    <appinfo> 
      <sch:title>Schematron validation</sch:title> 
      <sch:ns prefix="gml" uri="http://www.opengis.net/gml"/> 
      <sch:ns prefix="xlink" uri="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink"/> 
      <sch:pattern name="Check either href or content not both"> 
        <sch:rule abstract="true" id="hrefOrContent"> 
          <sch:report test="@xlink:href and (*|text())"> 
            Property element may not carry both a reference to an object and contain an object.</sch:report> 
          <sch:assert test="@xlink:href | (*|text())"> 
            Property element shall either carry a reference to an object or contain an object.</sch:assert> 
        </sch:rule> 
      </sch:pattern> 
    </appinfo> 
 
  <element name="_strictAssociation" type="gml:AssociationType" abstract="true"> 
    <annotation> 
      <appinfo> 
        <sch:pattern name="refAndContent co-occurence prohibited"> 
          <sch:rule context="gml:_strictAssociation"> 
            <sch:extends rule="hrefOrContent"/> 
          </sch:rule> 
        </sch:pattern> 
      </appinfo> 
      <documentation>shall carry a reference to an object or contain an object but not both</documentation> 
    </annotation> 
  </element> 
 
NOTE Some XML validators will process the Schematron constraints automatically.  Otherwise, the Schematron 
code can be treated merely as a formal description of the required constraint.  It is included here primarily as an illustration 
of how this might be used for specific purposes by application schema developers.   


7.5.4.2 gml:_reference, gml:ReferenceType 


Finally, in order to support the encoding of properties whose value is provided remotely by-reference (i.e. 
implementing the UML aggregation association), the following components are provided:   


  <element name="_reference" type="gml:ReferenceType" abstract="true"/> 
 
  <complexType name="ReferenceType"> 
    <sequence/> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 27 
 


 


  </complexType> 
 
The element gml:_reference is abstract, and thus may be used as the head of a subtitution group of more 
specific elements providing a value by reference.   


7.5.5 Convenience properties and property types 


7.5.5.1 gml:member  


 A concrete property element named member with complex content is declared in gmlBase: 


  <element name="member" type="gml:AssociationType"/> 
 
This is primarily to support the construction of object collections.  In an instance document this element may 
be used in a data instance as follows:  


  <gml:member xlink:href="http://my.org/thingie#i456" gml:remoteSchema="http://my.org/schemas/thingie.xsd"/> 
  


where the value is given by reference, or  


  <gml:member> 
     <my:Thingie  gml:id="i456"  /> 
  </gml:member> 
 
where the value is encoded inline.  Since gml:_Object is an abstract element, in  this real instance it is  
replaced by a concrete element in its substitution group.  The following element definition in the 
http://my.org/schemas/thingie.xsd application schema where my:ThingyType is defined supports this 
replacement: 


  <element name=Thingie type=my:ThingyType substitutionGroup=gml:_Object/> 
 


7.5.5.2 gml:stringOrRefType 


gml:StringOrRefType is provided to contain extended text values.  It is defined in the schema document as 
follows: 


  <complexType name="StringOrRefType"> 
    <simpleContent> 
      <extension base="string"> 
        <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
      </extension> 
    </simpleContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
It is an implementation of the GML property model in a simpleContent type.   


NOTE This is possible because an empty string is schema-valid. 


This type is available wherever there is a need for a "text" type property. It is of string type, so the text can be 
included inline, but the value can also be referenced remotely via xlinks which are in the 
AssociationAttributeGroup. If the remote reference is present, then the value obtained by traversing the link 
should be used if possible, and the string content of the element can be used for an annotation.   


7.5.6 Standard properties of GML Objects 


XML Schema types for all concrete GML objects derive from gml:AbstractGMLType. This means that all GML 
objects inherit certain standard properties that are included in the content model of gml:AbstractGMLType.   







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


28  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


7.5.6.1 gml:metaDataProperty 


  <element name="metaDataProperty" type="gml:MetaDataPropertyType"/> 
 
This property contains or refers to a metadata package that contains metadata properties.  More detail is 
provided below in clause 7.5.8.    


7.5.6.2 gml:description 


  <element name="description" type="gml:StringOrRefType"/> 
 
The value of this property is a text description of the object.  description uses the GML StringOrRefType 
defined in clause 7.5.5.2, so may contain a simple text string content, or carry a reference to an external 
description.   


7.5.6.3 gml:name 


  <element name="name" type="gml:CodeType"/> 
 
This property provides a label for the object, commonly a descriptive name.  


An object may have several names, typically assigned by different authorities. gml:name uses the GML 
CodeType content model.  The authority for a name is indicated by the value of its (optional) codeSpace 
attribute.  The name may or may not be unique, as determined by the rules of the organization responsible for 
the codeSpace.  In common usage there will be one name per authority, so a processing application may 
select the name from its preferred codeSpace.   


7.5.6.4 gml:StandardObjectProperties 


The three preceding property elements are collected in a model group gml:StandardObjectProperties, defined 
as follows:   


  <group name="StandardObjectProperties"> 
    <sequence> 
      <element ref="gml:metaDataProperty" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
      <element ref="gml:description" minOccurs="0"/> 
      <element ref="gml:name" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
        <annotation> 
          <documentation>Multiple names may be provided.  These will often be distinguished by being assigned by different 
authorities, as indicated by the value of the codeSpace attribute.  In an instance document there will usually only be one 
name per authority. </documentation> 
        </annotation> 
      </element> 
    </sequence> 
  </group> 
 
This is provided for convenience in the construction of application schema, particularly when it is desired to 
define types derived by restriction from gml:AbstractGMLType and gml:AbstractFeatureType.  Derivation by 
restriction requires that all components that are used unchanged are copied down into the new type definition.  
As an alternative to including three lines for gml:metaDataproperty, gml:description and gml:name, a one line 
reference to gml:StandardObjectProperties may be used instead: 


      <group ref="gml:StandardObjectProperties"/> 
 


7.5.6.5 gml:id 


  <attribute name="id" type="ID"/> 
 
This property supports provision of a database handle for the object.  Its use is optional but recommended.  It 
is of XML type ID, so is constrained to be unique in the XML document within which it occurs.  An external 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 29 
 


 


identifier for the object in the form of a URI may be constructed using standard methods [URI].  This is done 
by concatenating the URI for the document, a fragment separator #, and the value of the attribute of XML 
type ID. 


7.5.7 Bags and arrays 


7.5.7.1 gml:ArrayAssociationType 


For a property that can have multiple values all with the same relationship to the containing object, the 
cardinality of the association is extended as follows: 


  <complexType name="ArrayAssociationType"> 
    <sequence> 
      <element ref="gml:_Object" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
    </sequence> 
  </complexType> 
 
  <element name="members" type="gml:ArrayAssociationType"/> 
 
This property element may appear in a data instance as follows: 


<gml:members> 
   <my:Thingie  gml:id="i456" /> 
   <my:Thingie  gml:id="i457" /> 
   <my:Thingie  gml:id="i458" /> 
</gml:members> 
 


7.5.7.2 gml:Array, gml:ArrayType, gml:Bag, gml:BagType 


Two concrete object elements are provided for generic arrays and bags.  The schema constructions are as 
follows: 


  <complexType name="ArrayType"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <extension base="gml:AbstractGMLType"> 
        <sequence> 
          <element ref="gml:members" minOccurs="0"/> 
        </sequence> 
      </extension> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
  <element name="Array" type="gml:ArrayType" substitutionGroup="gml:_GML"/> 
 
intended to be used for a collection whose member objects are of homogeneous type and where their order is 
significant, and  


  <complexType name="BagType"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <extension base="gml:AbstractGMLType"> 
        <sequence> 
          <element ref="gml:member" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
          <element ref="gml:members" minOccurs="0"/> 
        </sequence> 
      </extension> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
  <element name="Bag" type="gml:BagType" substitutionGroup="gml:_GML"/> 
 
for general collections with no implication about the type, order or uniqueness of the member objects.  







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


30  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


7.5.8 Metadata 


7.5.8.1 gml:metaDataProperty, gml:metaDataPropertyType, gml:_MetaData, 
gml:AbstractMetaDataType  


The metaDataProperty follows the property pattern and is used to contain or refer to metadata for GML 
objects.  It is defined in the schema as follows: 


  <complexType name="MetaDataPropertyType"> 
    <choice minOccurs="0"> 
      <element ref="gml:_MetaData" minOccurs="0"/> 
      <any processContents="lax"/> 
    </choice> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
    <attribute name="about" type="anyURI" use="optional"/> 
  </complexType> 
 
  <element name="metaDataProperty" type="gml:MetaDataPropertyType"/> 
 
The optional about attribute carries a URI which points to an element or range of elements, or other resource 
to which this metadata refers.   


The value of the metaDataProperty is an abstract element gml:_MetaData that acts as a placeholder for any 
package of metadata properties, defined as follows:   


  <complexType name="AbstractMetaDataType" abstract="true" mixed="true"> 
    <attribute ref="gml:id" use="optional"/> 
  </complexType> 
 
  <element name="_MetaData" type="gml:AbstractMetaDataType" abstract="true" substitutionGroup="gml:_Object"/> 
 
It is used as follows: 


1. The user defines or re-uses an existing metadata schema.  The structure of this metadata schema is 
more or less arbitrary but should satisfy the following pattern: 


 The metadata schema shall declare a single root element. This element shall be substitutable for 
gml:_MetaData  i.e. it is derived from AbstractMetaDataType 


 The content model of this root element shall be an XML Schema ComplexType that derives by 
extension from gml:AbstractMetaDataType. 


 The content model of this root element shall consist of an XML model group of elements each of 
which is a metadata property (e.g. age, accuracy, creation date etc.). of the object to which the 
gml:metaDataProperty is attached. 


 If the user wishes to more strongly restrict the value of the gml:metaDataProperty, the application 
schema designer shall define a new property that is an XML Schema restriction of 
gml:metaDataProperty. 


2. The metaDataProperty in the data instance points to or includes the values of the metadata properties 
defined by the schema in 1. above. 


3. The metaData property is used in one of two ways: 
 The metadata schema shall declare a single root element. This element shall be substitutable for 


gml:_MetaData. 


 Attached to a GML object and without the gml:about attribute it provides metadata for the GML 
object to which it is attached. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 31 
 


 


 Attached to a GML object collection and with the gml:about attribute it provides metadata for the GML 
objects within the object collection referenced by the gml:about attribute, the value of which is an 
XPointer expression. 


Alternatively, any other existing metadata syntax in XML can be used instead of an element substitutable for 
gml:_MetaData due to the  


      <any processContents="lax"/> 
 
declaration.  


If metadata following the conceptual model of ISO 19115:2003 shall be encoded in a GML document, the 
corresponding Implementation Specification specified in ISO WD 19139 shall be used to encode the metadata 
information.  


7.5.8.2 gml:GenericMetaData, gml:GenericMetaDataType  


For convenience, a generic concrete MetaData element has been provided in GML 3.0.0. This element is 
deprecated with GML 3.1.0. 


  <complexType name="GenericMetaDataType" mixed="true"> 
    <complexContent mixed="true"> 
      <extension base="gml:AbstractMetaDataType"> 
        <sequence> 
          <any processContents="lax" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
        </sequence> 
      </extension> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
  <element name="GenericMetaData" type="gml:GenericMetaDataType" substitutionGroup="gml:_MetaData"/> 
 
This element has been intended to act as a container for metadata encoded using XML but defined in external 
schemas, in cases where it is not possible to assign the concrete components to the GML _MetaData 
substitution group. With GML 3.1.0 such metadata elements can be direct children of a gml:metadataProperty 
element. 


8 GML schemas  feature model 


8.1 General Concepts 


A GML feature is a meaningful object in the selected domain of discourse such as a Road, River, Person, 
Vehicle or Administrative Area.  This follows the general definition of a feature given in ISO 19109 and the 
OGC Abstract Specification Topic 5. 


8.2 Feature schema 


The feature schema, feature.xsd, provides a framework for the creation of GML features and feature 
collections.  These are described in the schema listed in Annex C.  The feature schema includes a basic 
geometry schema (geometryBasic2d.xsd).   


The feature schema is identified by the following location-independent name (using URN syntax): 


urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-xsd:feature:v3.1.0 
 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


32  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


8.2.1 Features 


8.2.1.1 gml:AbstractFeatureType 


The basic feature model is given by the gml:AbstractFeatureType, defined in the schema as follows:   


  <complexType name="AbstractFeatureType" abstract="true"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <extension base="gml:AbstractGMLType"> 
        <sequence> 
          <element ref="gml:boundedBy" minOccurs="0"/> 
          <element ref="gml:location" minOccurs="0"> 
          <annotation> 
            <appinfo>deprecated</appinfo> 
            <documentation>deprecated in GML version 3.1</documentation> 
          </annotation> 
          </element> 
        </sequence> 
        <attribute name="fid" type="string"> 
          <annotation> 
            <appinfo>deprecated</appinfo> 
            <documentation>deprecated in GML version 3.0</documentation> 
          </annotation> 
        </attribute> 
      </extension> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
The content model for gml:AbstractFeatureType adds two specific properties suitable for geographic features 
to the content model defined in gml:AbstractGMLType.  The value of the gml:boundedBy property describes 
an envelope that encloses the entire feature instance, and is primarily useful for supporting rapid searching for 
features that occur in a particular location.  


The value of the gml:location property describes the extent, position or relative location of the feature. 


NOTE gml:location is deprecated as part of the standard content model of gml:AbstractFeatureType.   


GML features also have a (optional) fid attribute.  This is for backwards compatibility with GML 2 and is 
deprecated in GML 3.   


8.2.1.2 gml:_Feature 


The element gml:_Feature is declared as follows: 


  <element name="_Feature" type="gml:AbstractFeatureType" abstract="true" substitutionGroup="gml:_GML"/> 
 
This abstract element serves as the head of a substitution group which may contain any elements whose 
content model is derived from gml:AbstractFeatureType.  This may be used as a variable in the contruction of 
content models.   


gml:_Feature can be thought of as anything that is a GML feature and can be used to define variables or 
templates in which the value of a GML property is any feature. This occurs in particular in a GML Feature 
Collection (see 8.2.7) where the <gml:featureMember> and <gml:featureMembers> properties contain one or 
multiple copies of gml:_Feature respectively.  







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 33 
 


 


8.2.2 Standard feature properties 


8.2.2.1 gml:boundedBy, gml:BoundingShapeType, gml:EnvelopeWithTimePeriod , 
gml:EnvelopeWithTimePeriodType  


This property describes the minimum bounding box or rectangle that encloses the entire feature. Its content 
model is as follows: 


  <element name="boundedBy" type="gml:BoundingShapeType"/> 
  <complexType name="BoundingShapeType"> 
    <sequence> 
      <choice> 
        <element ref="gml:Envelope"/> 
        <element ref="gml:Null"/> 
      </choice> 
    </sequence> 
  </complexType> 
 
The gml:Envelope element is defined in clause 9.1.5.  A value of gml:Null may appear if an extent is not 
applicable or not available for some reason.   


NOTE Since an envelope is defined simply by the positions of two diagonally opposing corners, the exact footprint of 
an envelope depends on the coordinate reference system used.  If the feature being described has zero extent, then the 
two corners will coincide and the envelope has zero size.  As for all properties, it is the responsibility of the data provider to 
ensure that the value is correct.   


NOTE To provide backward compatibility with GML version 2, an additional element gml:Box is provided, with an 
identical content model and substitutable for gml:Envelope.  This component is deprecated and should not be used in new 
applications.   


For envelopes that include a temporal extent, gml:EnvelopeWithTimePeriod is provided, defined as follows: 


  <complexType name="EnvelopeWithTimePeriodType"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <extension base="gml:EnvelopeType"> 
        <sequence> 
          <element ref="gml:timePosition" minOccurs="2" maxOccurs="2"/> 
        </sequence> 
        <attribute name="frame" type="anyURI" use="optional" default="#ISO-8601"/>  
      </extension> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
  <element name="EnvelopeWithTimePeriod" type="gml:EnvelopeWithTimePeriodType" 
    substitutionGroup="gml:Envelope"/> 
 
This adds two gml:timePosition properties which describe the extent of a time-envelope.   


Since gml:EnvelopeWithTimePeriod is assigned to the substitution group headed by gml:Envelope, it may be 
used whenever gml:Envelope is valid.   


NOTE In common with all geometry elements derived from gml:AbstractGeometryType (clause 9.1.2.1), the 
coordinate reference system used for the positions defining the gml:Envelope may be indicated using the optional XML 
attribute srsName.  If the coordinate reference system being used includes a time axis, then gml:Envelope can be used 
directly to describe a spatio-temporal extent.   


8.2.2.2 gml:location, gml:LocationPropertyType, gml:LocationKeyword, gml:LocationString 


The gml:location element is a convenience property that describes the generalized location of the feature.  It is 
defined as follows: 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


34  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


  <element name="location" type="gml:LocationPropertyType"/> 
 
  <complexType name="LocationPropertyType"> 
    <sequence > 
      <choice> 
        <element ref="gml:_Geometry"/> 
        <element ref="gml:LocationKeyWord"/> 
        <element ref="gml:LocationString"/> 
        <element ref="gml:Null"/> 
      </choice> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
  </complexType> 
  
The value of a location can be a geometry, a location string, a location keyword, or a null.  


NOTE The flexible content model of the location property has proved to be difficult to implement in practice, so the 
element gml:location is deprecated in this version of GML. 


A location string is text which should describe the location.  It is declared as follows: 


  <element name="LocationString" type="gml:StringOrRefType"/> 
 
The location keyword is a code usually selected from a controlled list.  It is declared as follows: 


  <element name="LocationKeyWord" type="gml:CodeType"/> 
 
EXAMPLE The following examples illustrate the different ways that the location property may appear in a data 
instance.   


Location given as a gml Geometry in a particular spatial reference system: 


<gml:location> 
  <gml:Point gml:id="point96" srsName="urn:EPSG:geographicCRS:62836405"> 
    <gml:pos>-31.936 115.834</gml:pos> 
  </gml:Point> 
</gml:location> 
 
Location given using a name from a controlled source: 


<gml:location> 
  <gml:LocationKeyWord  
    codeSpace=" http://www.icsm.gov.au/icsm/cgna/index.html" 
    >Leederville</gml:LocationKeyWord> 
</gml:location> 
 
Location given using a text string: 


<gml:location> 
  <gml:LocationString>Nigel Fosters town of residence</gml: LocationString> 
</gml:location>  
 
Location given by another service: 


<gml:location xlink:href="http://www.ga.gov.au/bin/gazm01?placename=leederville&placetype=R&state=WA+"/> 
 


8.2.2.3 gml:priorityLocation, gml:priorityLocationType  


A property gml:priorityLocation is provided for GML Application Schema developers that wish to provide 
prioritized locations for their features.  A gml:priorityLocation has the following content model: 


  <element name="priorityLocation" type="gml:PriorityLocationPropertyType"  
              substitutionGroup="gml:location"/> 
 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 35 
 


 


  <complexType name="PriorityLocationPropertyType"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <extension base="gml:LocationPropertyType"> 
        <attribute name="priority" type="string" use="optional"/> 
      </extension> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
Note that this simply adds a priority string to the base gml:location property. This can be used to assign levels 
of importance to the different locations (e.g. location by location string, geometry etc.).  


NOTE The element gml:priorityLocation is deprecated in this version of GML. 


8.2.2.4 gml:featureProperty, gml:FeaturePropertyType, gml:featureMember 


A particular class of properties define associations between features. These use the gml:AssociationType 
pattern as follows: 


  <complexType name="FeaturePropertyType"> 
    <sequence> 
      <element ref="gml:_Feature" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
  </complexType> 
 
The concrete elements gml:featureMember and gml:featureProperty use this content model, and are declared 
as follows: 


  <element name="featureProperty" type="gml:FeaturePropertyType"/> 
 
  <element name="featureMember" type="gml:FeaturePropertyType"/> 
 


8.2.2.5 gml:featureMembers, gml:FeatureArrayPropertyType  


At times it is useful to define a property containing an array of other features. This is done using a feature 
array property type as defined by the following content model: 


  <complexType name="FeatureArrayPropertyType"> 
    <sequence> 
      <element ref="gml:_Feature" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
    </sequence> 
  </complexType> 
 
The concrete elements gml:featureMembers uses this content model, and is declared as follows: 


  <element name="featureMembers" type="gml:FeatureArrayPropertyType"/> 
 


8.2.3 Geometry Properties 


In general the definition of feature properties is in the responsibility of the application schema designer. 
However, since the OGC abstract specification defines a limited set of basic geometry types, GML defines a 
set of predefined geometric property elements to associate instances of these geometry types with features. 


The GML Feature schema also provides descriptive names for the geometry properties, encoded as common 
English language terms. Overall, there are three levels of naming geometry properties in GML: 


Formal names that denote geometry properties in a manner based on the type of geometry allowed as a 
property value. These are names based on the name of the geometry type with a suffix Property. 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


36  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


Table 1 Pre-defined formal geometry properties 


Formal property name XML Schema property type  Associated geometry object types (element names) 


pointProperty PointPropertyType Point 


curveProperty CurvePropertyType 


_Curve 


LineString 


Curve 


OrientableCurve 


CompositeCurve 


surfaceProperty SurfacePropertyType 


_Surface 


Polygon 


Surface 


OrientableSurface 


CompositeSurface 


solidProperty SolidPropertyType 


_Solid 


Solid 


CompositeSolid 


multiPointProperty MultiPointPropertyType MultiPoint 


multiCurveProperty MultiCurvePropertyType MultiCurve 


multiSurfaceProperty MultiSurfacePropertyType MultiSurface 


multiSolidProperty MultiSolidPropertyType MultiSolid 


multiGeometryProperty MultiGeometryPropertyType MultiGeometry 


pointArrayProperty PointArrayPropertyType Point(s) 


curveArrayProperty CurveArrayPropertyType _Curve(s) 


LineString(s) 


Curve(s) 


OrientableCurve(s) 


CompositeCurve(s) 


surfaceArrayProperty SurfaceArrayPropertyType _Surface(s) 


Polygon(s) 


Surface(s) 


OrientableSurface(s) 


CompositeSurface(s) 


solidArrayProperty SolidArrayPropertyType _Solid(s) 


Solid(s) 


CompositeSolid(s) 


 


The precise semantics of these geometry properties (e.g. "What does pointProperty of an object mean?") is 
not specified.  


Descriptive names that provide a set of standardized synonyms or aliases defined in feature.xsd for the 
formal names; these allow use of a more user-friendly set of terms. These are: 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 37 
 


 


  <element name="centerOf" type="gml:PointPropertyType"/> 
  <element name="position" type="gml:PointPropertyType"/> 
  <element name="extentOf" type="gml:SurfacePropertyType"/> 
  <element name="edgeOf" type="gml:CurvePropertyType"/> 
  <element name="centerLineOf" type="gml:CurvePropertyType"/> 
  
  <element name="multiLocation" type="gml:MultiPointPropertyType"/> 
  <element name="multiCenterOf" type="gml:MultiPointPropertyType"/> 
  <element name="multiPosition" type="gml:MultiPointPropertyType"/> 
  <element name="multiCenterLineOf" type="gml:MultiCurvePropertyType"/> 
  <element name="multiEdgeOf" type="gml:MultiCurvePropertyType"/> 
  <element name="multiCoverage" type="gml:MultiSurfacePropertyType"/> 
  <element name="multiExtentOf" type="gml:MultiSurfacePropertyType"/> 
 
These property elements provide common role names for the geometry of geographic features.  The specific 
semantics of these role names (e.g. centerOf) is not defined in GML, and it is expected that additional 
clarification would be provided in <annotations> within the using GML application schema. 


Application-specific names chosen by users and defined in application schemas based on GML. 


There are no inherent restrictions in the type of geometry property a feature type may have. For example, a 
RadioTower feature type could have a location that returns a Point geometry to identify its location, and have 
another geometry property called extentOf that returns a Polygon geometry describing its physical structure, 
and have yet a third geometry property called serviceArea that returns a Polygon geometry describing the 
area in which its transmissions can be received reliably. 


8.2.4 Topology Properties 


In general the definition of topology properties is in the responsibility of the application schema designer. 
However, GML defines topology property elements that may be used to associate instances of topology types 
with features.  All of hese predefined topology property elements have formal names, so there are just two 
levels of naming topolgy properties in GML: 


Formal names that denote geometry properties in a manner based on the type of topology allowed as a 
property value.  Note that the first four of these properties express direction, whereas the others do not.   


Table 2 Pre-defined formal topology properties 


Formal property name XML Schema property type  Associated topology object types (element names) 


directedNode DirectedNodePropertyType Node 


directedEdge DirectedEdgePropertyType Edge 


directedFace DirectedFacePropertyType Face 


directedTopoSolid DirectedTopoSolidPropertyType TopoSolid 


topoPointProperty TopoPointPropertyType TopoPoint 


topoCurveProperty TopoCurvePropertyType TopoCurve 


topoSurfaceProperty TopoSurfacePropertyType TopoSurface 


topoVolumeProperty TopoVolumePropertyType TopoVolume 


topoComplexProperty TopoComplexMemberType TopoComplex 


 


Application-specific names chosen by users and defined in application schemas based on GML. 


There are no inherent restrictions of the type of topology property a feature type may have. For example, a 
StatisticalArea feature type could have one or more topoCurveProperty that returns a TopoCurve to represent 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


38  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


the boundary of the Statistical Area, and one or more topoSurfaceProperty that returns a TopoSurface to 
represent the Statistical Area itself. 


8.2.5 Temporal Properties 


8.2.5.1 General purpose temporal properties 


GML includes a small number of temporal property types that may be used in application schemas.  Four 
(concrete) global elements representing time properties are provided for general use (compare with geometry 
properties described in clause 8.2.3): 


gml:timePosition - for associating a direct time position with a feature or other object, encoded as a literal 


gml:duration, gml:timeInterval - for associating a duration with a feature or other object 


gml:validTime - for associating a time primitive with a feature or other object.   


However, the temporal objects and the property types that refer to them provide a relatively comprehensive 
set of components for associating temporal information with features an other objects.   


8.2.5.2 Specific temporal properties 


In general the definition of feature properties is in the responsibility of the application schema designer.  
Following the standard GML property model, the name of a property element should reflect the semantics of 
the relationship of the temporal object with the containing feature or other object.   For example a feature type 
may have a constructionTime property whose XML type is gml:TimePeriodPropertyType, a completionTime 
property whose XML type is gml:TimeInstantPropertyType, and an age whose XML type is gml: 
TimeDurationType or gml:TimeIntervalLengthType.  The following types are provided for direct use in 
declaring property elements: 


XML Schema property type Associated object types and substitutable object 
types 


TimePrimitivePropertyType _TimePrimitive,  
_TimeGeometricPrimitive, TimeInstant, TimePeriod,  
_TimeTopologyPrimitive, TimeEdge, TimeNode 


TimeGeometricPrimitivePropertyType _TimeGeometricPrimitive, TimeInstant, TimePeriod 


TimeInstantPropertyType TimeInstant 


TimePeriodPropertyType TimePeriod 


TimeTopologyPrimitivePropertyType _TimeTopologyPrimitive, TimeEdge, TimeNode 


TimeEdgePropertyType TimeEdge 


TimeNodePropertyType TimeNode 


TimeTopologyComplexPropertyType TimeTopologyComplex 


TimeOrdinalEraPropertyType TimeOrdinalEra 


TimeCalendarPropertyType TimeCalendar 


TimeCalendarEraPropertyType TimeCalendarEra 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 39 
 


 


TimeClockPropertyType TimeClock 


 


8.2.6 Defining specific feature types 


All specific feature types defined in application schemas shall be derived from gml:AbstractFeatureType, and 
thus all GML features inherit the optional gml:boundedBy and gml:location properties, as well as the standard 
gml:metaDataProperty, gml:description and gml:name properties inherited in turn from gml:AbstractGMLType, 
unless any property is suppressed in a derivation by restriction.  AbstractFeatureType also inherits gml:id from 
gml:AbstractGMLType and this is the preferred means of supporting database identifiers in GML 3. 


This type derivation requirement means that general purpose software designed to process arbitrary GML 
data shall be able to traverse the XML Schema derivation tree in order to determine whether or not a given 
element in the data stream is a GML feature.   


A GML feature has a set of properties, where the specific set of properties defines the feature type.  This 
follows the general definition of a feature given in ISO 19109, 19110 and the OGC Abstract Specification 
Topic 5.  Properties have simple values, using XML Schema simpleContent types, or properties may have 
complex values, in which case they should be declared using the gml:AssociationType pattern described in 
Clause 7.5.3.   


In the application schema defining a feature there shall be a global element declared whose name is the 
semantic type of the feature in the domain of discourse. 


  <element name="<<featureName>>"  type = <<contentModel >> /> 
 
If that feature element may be used in a general gml:FeatureCollection, or in a feature collection defined by a 
different application schema, then its global element declaration shall be made a member of the gml:_Feature 
substitution group: 


  <element name="<<featureName>>"  type = <<contentModel >> substitutionGroup=gml:_Feature /> 
 
The content model of the feature may be a named (or anonymous) complex type. 


8.2.6.1 gml:BoundedFeatureType 


A simple restriction of gml:AbstractFeatureType makes the optional boundedBy property mandatory.  
gml:BoundedFeatureType is defined as follows: 


  <complexType name="BoundedFeatureType" abstract="true"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <restriction base="gml:AbstractFeatureType"> 
        <sequence> 
          <group ref="gml:StandardObjectProperties"/> 
          <element ref="gml:boundedBy"/> 
          <element ref="gml:location" minOccurs="0"> 
          <annotation> 
            <appinfo>deprecated</appinfo> 
            <documentation>deprecated in GML version 3.1</documentation> 
          </annotation> 
          </element> 
        </sequence> 
      </restriction> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
NOTE In XML Schema a content model derived by restriction must lead to a content model which is valid according to 
the base type  i.e. it is a valid subset of the parent.  In the schema document this is expressed by copying down all the 
XML elements that are required for the content of the derived type, with their occurrence counts.  In this instance the 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


40  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


adjustment made in the derived type is that an element that was optional in the parent (gml:boundedBy had 
minOccurs=0) is made mandatory (no occurrence constraints implies exactly one). Any element from the parent that is 
omitted (which can only be those with minOccurs=0 in the parent definition) is not inherited by the derived type.  In 
contrast, it is not necessary to copy down the XML attributes, only those which are altered by restriction need be 
mentioned.  By default the derived type has the same XML attributes and occurrence constraints as the parent.   See XML 
Schema Part 1 (Structures) for more detail. 
 


8.2.7 Feature Collections 


A GML Feature Collection is a list of GML feature instances.   


8.2.7.1 gml:AbstractFeatureCollectionType 


GML feature collections shall be derived by extension or restriction from gml:AbstractFeatureCollectionType, 
defined as follows: 


  <complexType name="AbstractFeatureCollectionType" abstract="true"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <extension base="gml:AbstractFeatureType"> 
        <sequence> 
          <element ref="gml:featureMember" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
          <element ref="gml:featureMembers" minOccurs="0"/> 
        </sequence> 
      </extension> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 


The gml:featureMember property (but not the gml:featureMembers property) follows the association pattern 
and can thus refer to a remote feature by means of the xlink:ref attribute. 


The compositing property gml:featureMembers encloses a set of members of the Feature Collection 
regardless of their semantic type as features. gml:featureMember encloses or references a single feature 
instance.  gml:featureMember and gml:featureMembers properties can appear on the same Feature 
Collection, but there can be only one gml:featureMembers property.   


GML Feature Collections are themselves valid GML features and can have gml:location and other properties 
as defined in their GML Application Schema (see chapter 8.). 


8.2.7.2 gml:_FeatureCollection, gml:FeatureCollection, gml:FeatureCollectionType  


  <element name="_FeatureCollection" type="gml:AbstractFeatureCollectionType" abstract="true" 
substitutionGroup="gml:_Feature"/> 
 
This abstract element gml:_FeatureCollection serves as the head of a substitution group which may contain 
any elements whose content model is derived from gml:AbstractFeatureType.  This may be used as a variable 
in the contruction of content models.   


The schema also provides a concrete feature collection: 


  <element name="FeatureCollection" type="gml:FeatureCollectionType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Feature"/> 
 
  <complexType name="FeatureCollectionType"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <extension base="gml:AbstractFeatureCollectionType"/> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 


 
Users of the concrete gml:FeatureCollection should note that it allows any valid GML feature as a member. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 41 
 


 


The content model of a GML Feature Collection shall be derived from gml:AbstractFeatureCollectionType.  
This in turn derives from gml:AbstractFeatureType.  Hence feature collections are features, and are in general 
substitutable for gml:_Feature.  


8.3 Spatial reference system used in a feature or feature collection 


The value of the gml:boundedBy property for a feature or feature collection is usually a gml:Envelope.  In 
common with all geometry elements derived from gml:AbstractGeometryType (clause 9.1.2.1), the coordinate 
reference system used for the positions defining the gml:Envelope may be indicated using the optional XML 
attribute srsName.   


For convenience in constructing feature and feature collection instances, the value of the srsName attribute on 
the gml:Envelope (or gml:Box) which is the value of the gml:boundedBy property of the feature shall be 
inherited by all directly expressed geometries in all properties of the feature or members of the collection, 
unless overruled by the presence of a local srsName.  Thus it is not necessary for a geometry to carry an 
srsName attribute if it uses the same coordinate reference system as given on the gml:boundedBy property of 
its parent feature.  Inheritance of the coordinate reference system continues to any depth of nesting, but if 
overruled by a local srsName declaration, then the new coordinate reference system is inherited by all its 
children in turn.   


Notwithstanding this rule, all the geometries used in a feature or feature collection may carry srsName 
attributes, in order to indicate the reference system used locally, even if they are the same as the parent.   


9 GML schemas  basic geometry  


9.1 General Concepts 


9.1.1 Overview 


NOTE The geometry model of GML complies with ISO 19107. The underlying concepts of the types and elements of 
the GML geometry model are discussed in this document in more detail.  


This clause describes the basic geometry model used by GML in the XML Schema documents: 


 geometryBasic0d1d.xsd 


 geometryBasic2d.xsd 


The basic GML types and elements are described in the schemas listed in Annex C. The geometry schemas 
are identified by the following location-independent name (using URN syntax): 


urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-xsd:geometryBasic0d1d:v3.1.0 
urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-xsd:geometryBasic2d:v3.1.0 


 
All types, elements and attributes in these XML Schema documents are covered by this Clause.  


NOTE The GML geometry model is complex. To make the schemas more accessible to readers with or without prior 
experience with GML 2, the different types and elements are grouped in several XML Schema documents. 


Any geometry element that inherits the semantics of AbstractGeometryType can be viewed as a set of direct 
positions.  


All of the classes derived from AbstractGeometryType inherit an optional association to a coordinate reference 
system. All direct positions shall directly or indirectly be associated with a coordinate reference system. When 
geometry elements are aggregated in another geometry element (such as a MultiGeometry or 
GeometricComplex), which already has a coordinate reference system specified, then these elements are 
assumed to be in that same coordinate reference system unless otherwise specified. 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


42  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


The geometry model distinguishes geometric primitives, aggregates and complexes.  


Geometric primitives (i.e. instances of a subtype of AbstractGeometricPrimitiveType) will be open, that is, they 
will not contain their boundary points; curves will not contain their end points, surfaces will not contain their 
boundary curves, and solids will not contain their bounding surfaces. 


9.1.2 Abstract Geometry 


9.1.2.1 gml:AbstractGeometryType 


 <complexType name="AbstractGeometryType" abstract="true"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGMLType"> 
    <attribute name="gid" type="string" use="optional" /> 
                 <annotation> 
                    <appinfo>deprecated</appinfo> 
                    <documentation>deprecated in GML version 3.0</documentation> 
                 </annotation> 
    </attribute> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:SRSReferenceGroup"/> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 


All geometry elements are derived directly or indirectly from this abstract supertype. A geometry element may 
have an identifying attribute ("gml:id"), a name (attribute "name") and a description (attribute "description"). It 
may be associated with a spatial reference system (attribute group "gml:SRSReferenceGroup"). 


The following rules shall be adhered to: 


 Every geometry type shall derive from this abstract type. 


 Every geometry element (i.e. an element of a geometry type) shall be directly or indirectly in the 
substitution group of _Geometry. 


NOTE The attribute gid is included for backward compatibility with GML 2 and is deprecated with GML 3. This 
identifier is superceded by "gml:id" inherited from AbstractGMLType. The attribute "gid" should not be used anymore and 
may be deleted in future versions of GML without further notice. 


9.1.2.2 SRSReferenceGroup 


 <attributeGroup name="SRSReferenceGroup"> 
  <attribute name="srsName" type="anyURI" use="optional"/> 
  <attribute name="srsDimension" type="positiveInteger" use="optional"/> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:SRSInformationGroup"/> 
 </attributeGroup> 
 
The attribute group SRSReferenceGroup is an optional reference to the CRS used by this geometry, with 
optional additional information to simplify the processing of the coordinates when a more complete definition 
of the CRS is not needed. 


In general the attribute srsName points to a CRS instance of gml:CoordinateReferenceSystemType (see 
coordinateReferenceSystems.xsd). For well-known references it is not required that the CRS description 
exists at the location the URI points to.  


If no srsName attribute is given, the CRS shall be specified as part of the larger context this geometry element 
is part of, e.g. a geometric aggregate. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 43 
 


 


NOTE The name srsName has been chosen deliberately. In the current version of GML crsName would be more 
appropriate, however, in future versions other types of spatial reference systems, i.e. those using geographic identifiers, 
may be supported by GML, too. 


The optional attribute srsDimension is the length of coordinate sequence in a position. This dimension is a 
derived from the coordinate reference system. When the srsName attribute is omitted, this attribute shall be 
omitted. 


9.1.2.3 SRSInformationGroup 


 <attributeGroup name="SRSInformationGroup"> 
  <attribute name="axisLabels" type="gml:NCNameList" use="optional"/> 
  <attribute name="uomLabels" type="gml:NCNameList" use="optional"/> 
 </attributeGroup> 
 


The attributes uomLabels and axisLabels, defined in the SRSInformationGroup attribute group, are 
optional additional and redundant information for a CRS to simplify the processing of the coordinate values 
when a more complete definition of the CRS is not needed. This information shall be the same as included in 
the complete definition of the CRS, referenced by the srsName attribute. When the srsName attribute is 
included, either both or neither of the axisLabels and uomLabels attributes shall be included. When the 
srsName attribute is omitted, both of these attributes shall be omitted. 


The attribute axisLabels is an ordered list of labels for all the axes of this CRS. The gml:axisAbbrev value 
should be used for these axis labels, after spaces and forbiddden characters are removed. When the 
srsName attribute is included, this attribute is optional. When the srsName attribute is omitted, this attribute 
shall also be omitted. 


The attribute uomLabels is an ordered list of unit of measure (uom) labels for all the axes of this CRS. The 
value of the string in the gml:catalogSymbol should be used for this uom labels, after spaces and forbiddden 
characters are removed. When the axisLabels attribute is included, this attribute shall also be included. 
When the axisLabels attribute is omitted, this attribute shall also be omitted. 


9.1.2.4 gml:_Geometry 


 <element name="_Geometry" type="gml:AbstractGeometryType" abstract="true" substitutionGroup="gml:_GML" /> 
 
The "_Geometry" element is the abstract head of the substitution group for all geometry elements of GML 3. 
This includes pre-defined and user-defined geometry elements. Any geometry element shall be a direct or 
indirect extension/restriction of AbstractGeometryType and shall be directly or indirectly in the substitution 
group of "_Geometry". 


9.1.2.5 gml:GeometryPropertyType 


 <complexType name="GeometryPropertyType"> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:_Geometry"  minOccurs="0" /> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup" /> 
 </complexType> 
 
A geometric property can either be any geometry element encapsulated in an element of this type or an XLink 
reference to a remote geometry element (where remote includes geometry elements located elsewhere in the 
same or another document). Note that either the reference or the contained element shall be given, but not 
both or none. See clause 7.5.3. 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


44  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


If a feature has a property, which takes a geometry element as its value, this is called a geometry property. A 
generic type for such a geometry property is GeometryPropertyType which follows the general rules described 
in clauses 7.5.3.  


9.1.2.6 gml:GeometryArrayPropertyType 


 <complexType name="GeometryArrayPropertyType"> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:_Geometry"  minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded" /> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 


A container for an array of geometry elements. The elements are always contained in the array property, 
referencing geometry elements or arrays of geometry elements via XLinks is not supported. 


If a feature has a property which takes an array of geometry elements as its value, this is called a geometry 
array property. A generic type for such a geometry property is GeometryArrayPropertyType which follows the 
general rules described in clause 7.5.3.  


In general the elements in an array have to be homogenous, containing elements that are all of the same 
type.  For example, all elements in a GeometryArrayPropertyType are of the type AbstractGeometryType 
(including types derived from this abstract base type) as long as the element is directly or indirectly 
substitutable for gml:_Geometry. 


9.1.3 Coordinate Geometry 


9.1.3.1 gml:DirectPositionType, gml:pos 


 <complexType name="DirectPositionType"> 
  <simpleContent> 
   <extension base="gml:doubleList"> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:SRSReferenceGroup"/> 
   </extension> 
  </simpleContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
 <element name="pos" type="gml:DirectPositionType" /> 
 


DirectPosition instances hold the coordinates for a position within some coordinate reference system (CRS). 
Since DirectPositions, as data types, will often be included in larger objects (such as geometry elements) that 
have references to CRS, the "srsName" attribute will in general be missing, if this particular DirectPosition is 
included in a larger element with such a reference to a CRS. In this case, the CRS is implicitly assumed to 
take on the value of the containing object's CRS. 


The attribute group SRSReferenceGroup is described in clause 9.1.2.2. If no srsName attribute is given, the 
CRS shall be specified as part of the larger context this geometry element is part of, e.g. a geometric element 
like point, curve, etc. It is expected that the attribute will be specified at the direct position level only in rare 
cases. 


9.1.3.2 gml:DirectPositionListType, gml:posList 


 <complexType name="DirectPositionListType"> 
  <simpleContent> 
   <extension base="gml:doubleList"> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:SRSReferenceGroup"/> 
    <attribute name="count" type="positiveInteger" use="optional" /> 
   </extension> 
  </simpleContent> 
 </complexType> 
 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 45 
 


 


 <element name="posList" type="gml:DirectPositionListType" /> 
 


posLists instances (and other instances with the content model specified by DirectPositionListType) hold the 
coordinates for a sequence of direct positions within the same coordinate reference system (CRS). 


The attribute group SRSReferenceGroup is described in clause 9.1.2.2. If no srsName attribute is given, the 
CRS shall be specified as part of the larger context this geometry element is part of, e.g. a geometric element 
like point, curve, etc. It is expected that the attribute will be specified at the direct position level only in rare 
cases. 


The optional attribute count allows to specify the number of direct positions in the list. If the attribute count 
is present then the attribute srsDimension shall be present, too. 


The number of entries in the list is equal to the product of the dimensionality of the coordinate reference 
system (i.e. it is a derived value of the coordinate reference system definition) and the number of direct 
positions. 


9.1.3.3 gml:geometricPositionGroup 


 <group name="geometricPositionGroup"> 
  <choice> 
   <element ref="gml:pos"/> 
   <element ref="gml:pointProperty"/> 
  </choice> 
 </group> 
 
GML supports two different ways to specify a geometric position: either by a direct position (a data type) or a 
point (a geometric object). 


"pos" elements are positions that are owned by the geometric primitive encapsulating this geometric 
position. 


"pointProperty" elements contain a point that may be referenced from other geometry elements or reference 
another point defined elsewhere (reuse of existing points). 


9.1.3.4 gml:geometricPositionListGroup 


 <group name="geometricPositionListGroup"> 
  <choice> 
   <element ref="gml:posList"/> 
   <group ref="gml:geometricPositionGroup" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
  </choice> 
 </group> 
 
GML supports two different ways to specify a list of geometric positions: either by a sequence of geometric 
positions (by reusing the group definition) or a sequence of direct positions (element posList).  


The "posList" element allows for a compact way to specify the coordinates of the positions, if all positions are 
represented in the same coordinate reference systems. 


NOTE The definition of this group may be used as a pattern in the definition of geometric primitives instead of using 
this group definition directly. The main change will typically be a change in the multiplicity of the referenced group. A 
LineString, for example, requires at least two positions. 


9.1.3.5 gml:CoordinatesType, gml:coordinates 


 <complexType name="CoordinatesType"> 
     <simpleContent> 
       <extension base="string"> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


46  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


         <attribute name="decimal" type="string" default="."/> 
         <attribute name="cs" type="string" default=","/> 
         <attribute name="ts" type="string" default="&#x20;"/> 
       </extension> 
     </simpleContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
 <element name="coordinates" type="gml:CoordinatesType" /> 
 
This type is deprecated with GML version 3.1.0 for tuples with ordinate values that are numbers. 


CoordinatesType is a text string, intended to be used to record an array of tuples or coordinates.  


While it is not possible to enforce the internal structure of the string through schema validation, some optional 
attributes have been provided in previous versions of GML to support a description of the internal structure. 
These attributes are deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. The attributes are intended to be used as follows: 


decimal symbol used for a decimal point  
(default=. a stop or period) 


cs         symbol used to separate components within a tuple or coordinate string  
(default=, a comma) 


ts         symbol used to separate tuples or coordinate strings  
(default=  a space) 


The "coordinates" element is deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. 


Since it is based on the XML Schema string type, CoordinatesType can be used in the construction of tables 
of tuples or arrays of tuples, including ones that contain mixed text and numeric values.  For example:  


  <my:tupleList>bettong,357.,2.3  skink,140.,0.75  wombat,770.,17.5</my:tupleList> 
 


9.1.3.6 gml:CoordType, gml:coord 


 <complexType name="CoordType"> 
  <sequence> 
   <element name="X" type="decimal" /> 
   <element name="Y" type="decimal" minOccurs="0" /> 
   <element name="Z" type="decimal" minOccurs="0" /> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 
Represents a coordinate tuple in one, two, or three dimensions. Deprecated with GML 3.0 and replaced by 
DirectPositionType. 


 <element name="coord" type="gml:CoordType" /> 
 
Deprecated with GML 3.0 and included for backwards compatibility with GML 2. Use the "pos" element 
instead. 


9.1.4 Vectors 


9.1.4.1 gml:VectorType, gml:Vector 


  <complexType name="VectorType"> 
    <simpleContent> 
      <restriction base="gml:DirectPositionType"/> 
    </simpleContent> 
  </complexType> 
 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 47 
 


 


  <element name="vector" type="gml:VectorType" /> 
 
A vector is an ordered set of numbers called coordinate that represent a position in space that is defined by a 
coordinate reference system (CRS). For some application the components of the position may be adjusted to 
yield a unit vector. 


NOTE This definition allows VectorType to be used elsewhere when appropriate  e.g. for offsetVector in grids.xsd, 
and vector to be used directly when appropriate  e.g. in DirectionVector in direction.xsd.   


9.1.5  Envelopes 


9.1.5.1 gml:EnvelopeType, gml:Envelope 


 <complexType name="EnvelopeType"> 
  <choice> 
   <sequence> 
    <element name="lowerCorner" type="gml:DirectPositionType"/> 
    <element name="upperCorner" type="gml:DirectPositionType"/> 
   </sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:coord" minOccurs="2" maxOccurs="2"/> 
   <element ref="gml:pos" minOccurs="2" maxOccurs="2"/> 
   <element ref="gml:coordinates"/> 
  </choice> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:SRSReferenceGroup"/> 
 </complexType> 
 
 <element name="Envelope" type="gml:EnvelopeType"/> 
 
Envelope defines an extent using a pair of positions defining opposite corners in arbitrary dimensions. The 
first direct position is the "lower corner" (a coordinate position consisting of all the minimal ordinates for each 
dimension for all points within the envelope), the second one the "upper corner" (a coordinate position 
consisting of all the maximal ordinates for each dimension for all points within the envelope). 


The use of the properties coord, coordinates and pos has been deprecated. The explicitly named 
properties lowerCorner and upperCorner shall be used instead. 


NOTE Regardless of dimension, an envelope can be represented without ambiguity as two direct positions 
(coordinate points) provided the ordering of those points adheres to the specified rule. Envelope is often referred to as a 
minimum bounding box or rectangle. However, this Envelope will not always specify the MINIMUM rectangular bounding 
region, if the referenced CRS is a Geographic CRS, or uses an Ellipsoidal, Spherical, Polar, or Cylindrical coordinate 
system, as those terms are specified in Subclause 12.4. Specifically, this Envelope will not specify the MINIMUM 
rectangular bounding region of a geometry whose set of points span the value discontinuity in an angular coordinate axis. 
Such axes include the Longitude and Latitude of  Ellipsoidal and Spherical coordinate systems. That geometry could lie 
within a small region on the surface of the ellipsoid or sphere, or could extend completely around the ellipsoid or sphere.   


9.2 Geometric Primitives 


9.2.1 Simple Geometric Primitives (0- and 1-dimensional) 


9.2.1.1 gml:AbstractGeometricPrimitiveType, gml:_GeometricPrimitive 


 <complexType name="AbstractGeometricPrimitiveType" abstract="true"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGeometryType" /> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
This is the abstract root type of the geometric primitives. A geometric primitive is a geometric object that is not 
decomposed further into other primitives in the system. All primitives are oriented in the direction implied by 
the sequence of their coordinate tuples. 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


48  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 <element name="_GeometricPrimitive" type="gml:AbstractGeometricPrimitiveType" abstract="true" 
 substitutionGroup="gml:_Geometry" /> 
 
The "_GeometricPrimitive" element is the abstract head of the substitution group for all (pre- and user-defined) 
geometric primitives. 


 <complexType name="GeometricPrimitivePropertyType"> 
  <sequence > 
   <element ref="gml:_GeometricPrimitive"  minOccurs="0" /> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup" /> 
 </complexType> 
 
A property that has a geometric primitive as its value domain can either be an appropriate geometry element 
encapsulated in an element of this type or an XLink reference to a remote geometry element (where remote 
includes geometry elements located elsewhere in the same document). Either the reference or the contained 
element shall be given, but neither both nor none. 


9.2.1.2 gml:PointType, gml:Point 


 <complexType name="PointType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGeometricPrimitiveType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <choice> 
      <element ref="gml:pos" /> 
      <element ref="gml:coordinates" /> 
      <element ref="gml:coord"> 
                   <annotation> 
                      <appinfo>deprecated</appinfo> 
                      <documentation>deprecated in GML version 3.0</documentation> 
                   </annotation> 
      </element> 
     </choice> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
 <element name="Point" type="gml:PointType" substitutionGroup="gml:_GeometricPrimitive" /> 
 
A Point is defined by a single coordinate tuple. The direct position of a point is specified by the "pos" element 
which is of type DirectPositionType. 


The use of the element coordinates is deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use posList instead. 


The use of the elements coord is deprecated. Use "pos" instead, the element is included only for backwards 
compatibility with previous versions of GML. 


9.2.1.3 gml:PointPropertyType, gml:pointProperty 


 <complexType name="PointPropertyType"> 
  <sequence > 
   <element ref="gml:Point" minOccurs="0" /> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup" /> 
 </complexType> 


A property that has a point as its value domain can either be an appropriate geometry element encapsulated 
in an element of this type or an XLink reference to a remote geometry element (where remote includes 
geometry elements located elsewhere in the same document). Either the reference or the contained element 
shall be given, but neither both nor none. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 49 
 


 


 <element name="pointProperty" type="gml:PointPropertyType" /> 
 
This property element either references a point via the XLink-attributes or contains the point element. 
pointProperty is the predefined property which can be used by GML Application Schemas whenever a GML 
Feature has a property with a value that is substitutable for Point. 


9.2.1.4 gml:PointArrayPropertyType, gml:pointArrayProperty 


 <complexType name="PointArrayPropertyType"> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:Point" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded" /> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 
A container for an array of points. The elements are always contained in the array property, referencing 
geometry elements or arrays of geometry elements via XLinks is not supported. 


 <element name="pointArrayProperty" type="gml:PointArrayPropertyType" /> 
 
This property element contains a list of point elements. pointArrayProperty is the predefined property which 
can be used by GML Application Schemas whenever a GML Feature has a property with a value that is 
substitutable for a list of Points. 


9.2.1.5 gml:AbstractCurveType, gml:_Curve 


 <complexType name="AbstractCurveType" abstract="true"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGeometricPrimitiveType" /> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
An abstraction of a curve to support the different levels of complexity. The curve can always be viewed as a 
geometric primitive, i.e. is continuous. 


 <element name="_Curve" type="gml:AbstractCurveType" abstract="true" 
 substitutionGroup="gml:_GeometricPrimitive" /> 
 
The "_Curve" element is the abstract head of the substitution group for all (continuous) curve elements. 


9.2.1.6 gml:CurvePropertyType, gml:curveProperty 


 <complexType name="CurvePropertyType"> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:_Curve"  minOccurs="0"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup" /> 
 </complexType> 
 
A property that has a curve as its value domain can either be an appropriate geometry element encapsulated 
in an element of this type or an XLink reference to a remote geometry element (where remote includes 
geometry elements located elsewhere in the same document). Either the reference or the contained element 
shall be given, but neither both nor none. 


 <element name="curveProperty" type="gml:CurvePropertyType" /> 
 
This property element either references a curve via the XLink-attributes or contains the curve element. 
curveProperty is the predefined property which can be used by GML Application Schemas whenever a GML 
Feature has a property with a value that is substitutable for _Curve. 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


50  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


9.2.1.7 gml:CurveArrayPropertyType, gml:curveArrayProperty 


 <complexType name="CurveArrayPropertyType"> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:_Curve"  minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 
A container for an array of curves. The elements are always contained in the array property, referencing 
geometry elements or arrays of geometry elements via XLinks is not supported. 


 <element name="curveArrayProperty" type="gml:CurveArrayPropertyType" /> 
 
This property element contains a list of curve elements. curveArrayProperty is the predefined property which 
can be used by GML Application Schemas whenever a GML Feature has a property with a value that is 
substitutable for a list of _Curves. 


9.2.1.8 gml:LineStringType, gml:LineString 


 <complexType name="LineStringType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCurveType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <choice> 
      <choice minOccurs="2" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
       <element ref="gml:pos" /> 
       <element ref="gml:pointProperty" /> 
       <element ref="gml:coord"> 
                    <annotation> 
                       <appinfo>deprecated</appinfo> 
                       <documentation>deprecated in GML version 3.0</documentation> 
                    </annotation> 
       </element> 
      </choice> 
      <element ref="gml:posList" /> 
      <element ref="gml:coordinates" /> 
     </choice> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
 <element name="LineString" type="gml:LineStringType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Curve" /> 
 
A LineString is a special curve that consists of a single segment with linear interpolation. It is defined by two or 
more coordinate tuples, with linear interpolation between them. It is backwards compatible with the LineString 
of GML 2. GM_LineString of ISO 19107 is implemented by LineStringSegment. 


GML supports two different ways to specify the control points of a line string: 


 A sequence of "pos" (DirectPositionType) or "pointProperty" (PointPropertyType) elements. "pos" 
elements are control points that are only part of this curve, "pointProperty" elements contain a point 
that may be referenced from other geometry elements or reference another point defined outside of 
this curve (reuse of existing points). 


 The "posList" element allows for a compact way to specify the coordinates of the control points, if all 
control points are in the same coordinate reference systems and belong to this curve only. The 
number of direct positions in the coordinates list shall be at least two and include the start and end 
point. Note that the start and end points of one line string are often identical with those of other line 
strings. 


The use of the element coordinates is deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use posList instead. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 51 
 


 


The use of the elements coord is deprecated. Use "pos" instead, the element is included only for backwards 
compatibility with previous versions of GML. 


9.2.1.9 gml:LineStringPropertyType, gml:lineStringProperty 


 <complexType name="LineStringPropertyType"> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:LineString"  minOccurs="0" /> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup" /> 
 </complexType> 
 
This type is deprecated with GML 3 and shall not be used. It is included for backwards compatibility with GML 
2. Use CurvePropertyType instead. 


A property that has a line string as its value domain can either be an appropriate geometry element 
encapsulated in an element of this type or an XLink reference to a remote geometry element (where remote 
includes geometry elements located elsewhere in the same document). Either the reference or the contained 
element shall be given, but neither both nor none. 


 <element name="lineStringProperty" type="gml:LineStringPropertyType" /> 
 
Deprecated with GML 3 and included only for backwards compatibility with GML 2. Use "curveProperty" 
instead. 


This property element either references a line string via the XLink-attributes or contains the line string 
element. 


9.2.2 Simple Geometric Primitives (2-dimensional) 


9.2.2.1 gml:AbstractSurfaceType, gml:_Surface 


 <complexType name="AbstractSurfaceType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGeometricPrimitiveType" /> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
An abstraction of a surface to support the different levels of complexity. A surface is always a continuous 
region of a plane. 


 <element name="_Surface" type="gml:AbstractSurfaceType" abstract="true"  
 substitutionGroup="gml:_GeometricPrimitive" /> 
 
The "_Surface" element is the abstract head of the substitution group for all (continuous) surface elements. 


9.2.2.2 gml:SurfacePropertyType, gml:surfaceProperty 


 <complexType name="SurfacePropertyType"> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:_Surface"  minOccurs="0" /> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup" /> 
 </complexType> 
 
A property that has a surface as its value domain can either be an appropriate geometry element 
encapsulated in an element of this type or an XLink reference to a remote geometry element (where remote 
includes geometry elements located elsewhere in the same document). Either the reference or the contained 
element shall be given, but neither both nor none. 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


52  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 <element name="surfaceProperty" type="gml:SurfacePropertyType" /> 
 
This property element either references a surface via the XLink-attributes or contains the surface element. 
surfaceProperty is the predefined property which can be used by GML Application Schemas whenever a GML 
Feature has a property with a value that is substitutable for _Surface. 


9.2.2.3 gml:SurfaceArrayPropertyType, gml:surfaceArrayProperty 


 <complexType name="SurfaceArrayPropertyType"> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:_Surface" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 
A container for an array of surfaces. The elements are always contained in the array property, referencing 
geometry elements or arrays of geometry elements via XLinks is not supported. 


 <element name="surfaceArrayProperty" type="gml:SurfaceArrayPropertyType" /> 
 
This property element contains a list of surface elements. surfaceArrayProperty is the predefined property 
which can be used by GML Application Schemas whenever a GML Feature has a property with a value that is 
substitutable for a list of _Surfaces. 


9.2.2.4 gml:PolygonType, gml:Polygon 


 <complexType name="PolygonType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractSurfaceType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:exterior" minOccurs="0" /> 
     <element ref="gml:interior" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded" /> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
 <element name="Polygon" type="gml:PolygonType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Surface" /> 
 
A Polygon is a special surface that is defined by a single surface patch. The boundary of this patch is coplanar 
and the polygon uses planar interpolation in its interior. It is backwards compatible with the Polygon of GML 2. 


NOTE GM_Polygon of ISO 19107 is implemented by PolygonPatch. 


The elements exterior and interior describe the surface boundary of the polygon and are specified below. 


9.2.2.5 gml:exterior, gml:interior, gml:outerBoundaryIs, gml:InnerBoundaryIs 


 <element name="exterior" type="gml:AbstractRingPropertyType" /> 
 
A boundary of a surface consists of a number of rings. In the normal 2D case, one of these rings is 
distinguished as being the exterior boundary. In a general manifold this is not always possible, in which case 
all boundaries shall be listed as interior boundaries, and the exterior will be empty. 


 <element name="interior" type="gml:AbstractRingPropertyType" /> 
 
A boundary of a surface consists of a number of rings. The "interior" rings separate the surface / surface patch 
from the area enclosed by the rings. 


 <element name="outerBoundaryIs" type="gml:AbstractRingPropertyType" substitutionGroup="gml:exterior" /> 
 
Deprecated with GML 3, included only for backwards compatibility with GML 2. Use "exterior" instead. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 53 
 


 


 <element name="innerBoundaryIs" type="gml:AbstractRingPropertyType" substitutionGroup="gml:interior" /> 
 
Deprecated with GML 3, included only for backwards compatibility with GML 2. Use "interior" instead. 


9.2.2.6 gml:AbstractRingType, gml:_Ring 


 <complexType name="AbstractRingType" abstract="true"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGeometryType" /> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
An abstraction of a ring to support surface boundaries of different complexity. 


 <element name="_Ring" type="gml:AbstractRingType" abstract="true" /> 
 
The "_Ring" element is the abstract head of the substituition group for all closed boundaries of a surface 
patch. 


9.2.2.7 gml:AbstractRingPropertyType 


 <complexType name="AbstractRingPropertyType"> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:_Ring" /> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 
Encapsulates a ring to represent the surface boundary property of a surface. 


9.2.2.8 gml:LinearRingType, gml:LinearRing 


 <complexType name="LinearRingType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractRingType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <choice> 
      <choice minOccurs="4" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
       <element ref="gml:pos" /> 
       <element ref="gml:pointProperty" /> 
      </choice> 
      <element ref="gml:posList" /> 
      <element ref="gml:coordinates" /> 
      <element ref="gml:coord" minOccurs="4" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
                   <annotation> 
                      <appinfo>deprecated</appinfo> 
                      <documentation>deprecated in GML version 3.0</documentation> 
                   </annotation> 
      </element> 
     </choice> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
 <element name="LinearRing" type="gml:LinearRingType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Ring" /> 
 
A LinearRing is defined by four or more coordinate tuples, with linear interpolation between them; the first and 
last coordinates shall be coincident. 


GML supports two different ways to specify the control points of a linear ring: 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


54  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 A sequence of "pos" (DirectPositionType) or "pointProperty" (PointPropertyType) elements. "pos" 
elements are control points that are only part of this ring, "pointProperty" elements contain a point that 
may be referenced from other geometry elements or reference another point defined outside of this 
ring (reuse of existing points). 


 The "posList" element allows for a compact way to specify the coordinates of the control points, if all 
control points are in the same coordinate reference systems and belong to this ring only. The number 
of direct positions in the list shall be at least four. 


The use of the element coordinates is deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use posList instead. 


The use of the elements coord is deprecated. Use "pos" instead, the element is included only for backwards 
compatibility with previous versions of GML. 


9.2.2.9 gml:LinearRingPropertyType 


 <complexType name="LinearRingPropertyType"> 
  <choice> 
   <element ref="gml:LinearRing" /> 
  </choice> 
 </complexType> 
 
Encapsulates a ring to represent properties in features or geometry collections. 


9.2.2.10 gml:PolygonPropertyType, gml:polygonProperty 


 <complexType name="PolygonPropertyType"> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:Polygon"  minOccurs="0" /> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup" /> 
 </complexType> 
 
This type is deprecated with GML 3 and shall not be used. It is included for backwards compatibility with GML 
2. Use SurfacePropertyType instead. 


A property that has a polygon as its value domain can either be an appropriate geometry element 
encapsulated in an element of this type or an XLink reference to a remote geometry element (where remote 
includes geometry elements located elsewhere in the same document). Either the reference or the contained 
element shall be given, but neither both nor none. 


 <element name="polygonProperty" type="gml:PolygonPropertyType" /> 
 
Deprecated with GML 3 and included only for backwards compatibility with GML 2. Use "surfaceProperty" 
instead. 


This property element either references a polygon via the XLink-attributes or contains the polygon element. 


10 GML schemas  more geometric primitives 


10.1 Overview 


Beside the simple geometric primitives specified in the previous chapter, this clause specifies additional 
primitives to describe real world situations which require a more expressive geometry model. 


This clause describes these primitives in the XML Schema document 


 geometryPrimitives.xsd. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 55 
 


 


The GML types and elements are described in the schemas listed in Annex C. The schema is identified by the 
following location-independent name (using URN syntax): 


urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-xsd:geometryPrimitives:v3.1.0 
 


All types, elements and attributes in this XML Schema document is covered by this Clause.  


10.2 Additional geometric primitives 


10.2.1 1-dimensional geometric primitives 


10.2.1.1 gml:CurveType, gml:Curve 


 <complexType name="CurveType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCurveType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:segments" /> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
 <element name="Curve" type="gml:CurveType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Curve" /> 
 
Curve is a 1-dimensional primitive. Curves are continuous, connected, and have a measurable length in terms 
of the coordinate system.  


A curve is composed of one or more curve segments. Each curve segment within a curve may be defined 
using a different interpolation method. The curve segments are connected to one another, with the end point 
of each segment except the last being the start point of the next segment in the segment list. 


The orientation of the curve is positive. 


The element segments encapsulates the segments of the curve. 


10.2.1.2 gml:AbstractCurveSegmentType, gml:_CurveSegment 


 <complexType name="AbstractCurveSegmentType" abstract="true"> 
  <attribute name="numDerivativesAtStart" type="integer" use="optional" default="0" /> 
  <attribute name="numDerivativesAtEnd" type="integer" use="optional" default="0" /> 
  <attribute name="numDerivativeInterior" type="integer" use="optional" default="0" /> 
 </complexType> 


Curve segment defines a homogeneous segment of a curve. 


The attribute "numDerivativesAtStart" specifies the type of continuity between this curve segment and its 
predecessor. If this is the first curve segment in the curve, one of these values, as appropriate, is ignored. The 
default value of "0" means simple continuity, which is a mandatory minimum level of continuity. This level is 
referred to as "C 0" in mathematical texts. A value of 1 means that the function and its first derivative are 
continuous at the appropriate end point: "C 1" continuity. A value of "n" for any integer means the function and 
its first n derivatives are continuous: "C n" continuity. 


The attribute "numDerivativesAtEnd" specifies the type of continuity between this curve segment and its 
successor. If this is the last curve segment in the curve, one of these values, as appropriate, is ignored. The 
default value of "0" means simple continuity, which is a mandatory minimum level of continuity. This level is 
referred to as "C 0" in mathematical texts. A value of 1 means that the function and its first derivative are 
continuous at the appropriate end point: "C 1" continuity. A value of "n" for any integer means the function and 
its first n derivatives are continuous: "C n" continuity. 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


56  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


The attribute "numDerivativesInterior" specifies the type of continuity that is guaranteed interior to the curve. 
The default value of "0" means simple continuity, which is a mandatory minimum level of continuity. This level 
is referred to as "C 0" in mathematical texts. A value of 1 means that the function and its first derivative are 
continuous at the appropriate end point: "C 1" continuity. A value of "n" for any integer means the function and 
its first n derivatives are continuous: "C n" continuity. 


NOTE Use of these attributes is only appropriate when the basic curve definition is an underdetermined system. For 
example, line string segments cannot support continuity above C 0 , since there is no spare control parameter to adjust 
the incoming angle at the end points of the segment. Spline functions on the other hand often have extra degrees of 
freedom on end segments that allow them to adjust the values of the derivatives to support C 1 or higher continuity. 


 <element name="_CurveSegment" type="gml:AbstractCurveSegmentType" abstract="true" /> 
 
The "_CurveSegment" element is the abstract head of the substituition group for all curve segment elements, 
i.e. continuous segments of the same interpolation mechanism. 


10.2.1.3 gml:CurveSegmentArrayPropertyType, gml:segments 


 <complexType name="CurveSegmentArrayPropertyType"> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:_CurveSegment" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded" /> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 
A container for an array of curve segments. 


 <element name="segments" type="gml:CurveSegmentArrayPropertyType" /> 
 
This property element contains a list of curve segments. The order of the elements is significant and shall be 
preserved when processing the array. 


10.2.1.4 gml:CurveInterpolationType 


 <simpleType name="CurveInterpolationType"> 
  <restriction base="string"> 
   <enumeration value="linear" /> 
   <enumeration value="geodesic" /> 
   <enumeration value="circularArc3Points" /> 
   <enumeration value="circularArc2PointWithBulge" /> 
   <enumeration value="circularArcCenterPointWithRadius" /> 
   <enumeration value="elliptical" /> 
   <enumeration value="clothoid" /> 
   <enumeration value="conic" /> 
   <enumeration value="polynomialSpline" /> 
   <enumeration value="cubicSpline" /> 
   <enumeration value="rationalSpline" /> 
  </restriction> 
 </simpleType> 
 
CurveInterpolationType is a list of codes that may be used to identify the interpolation mechanisms specified 
by an application schema. 


10.2.1.5 gml:LineStringSegmentType, gml:LineStringSegment 


 <complexType name="LineStringSegmentType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCurveSegmentType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <choice> 
      <choice minOccurs="2" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
       <element ref="gml:pos" /> 
       <element ref="gml:pointProperty" /> 
      </choice> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 57 
 


 


      <element ref="gml:posList" /> 
      <element ref="gml:coordinates" /> 
     </choice> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute name="interpolation" type="gml:CurveInterpolationType" fixed="linear" /> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
 <element name="LineStringSegment" type="gml:LineStringSegmentType"  


substitutionGroup="gml:_CurveSegment" /> 
 


A LineStringSegment is a curve segment that is defined by two or more coordinate tuples, with linear 
interpolation between them. 


NOTE LineStringSegment implements GM_LineString of ISO 19107. 


GML supports two different ways to specify the control points of a curve segment. 


 A sequence of "pos" (DirectPositionType) or "pointProperty" (PointPropertyType) elements. "pos" 
elements are control points that are only part of this curve segment, "pointProperty" elements contain 
a point that may be referenced from other geometry elements or reference another point defined 
outside of this curve segment (reuse of existing points). 


 The "posList" element allows for a compact way to specify the coordinates of the control points, if all 
control points are in the same coordinate reference systems and belong to this curve segment only. 
The number of direct positions in the coordinate list shall be at least two and include the start and end 
point. 


The attribute "interpolation" specifies the curve interpolation mechanism used for this segment. This 
mechanism uses the control points and control parameters to determine the position of this curve segment. 
For a LineStringSegment the interpolation is fixed as "linear". 


The use of the element coordinates is deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use posList instead. 


The use of the elements coord is deprecated. Use "pos" instead, the element is included only for backwards 
compatibility with previous versions of GML. 


10.2.1.6 gml:ArcStringType, gml:ArcString 


 <complexType name="ArcStringType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCurveSegmentType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <choice> 
      <choice minOccurs="3" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
       <element ref="gml:pos" /> 
       <element ref="gml:pointProperty" /> 
       <element ref="gml:pointRep" /> 
      </choice> 
      <element ref="gml:posList" /> 
      <element ref="gml:coordinates" /> 
     </choice> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute name="interpolation" type="gml:CurveInterpolationType" fixed="circularArc3Points" /> 
    <attribute name="numArc" type="integer" use="optional" /> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
 <element name="ArcString" type="gml:ArcStringType" substitutionGroup="gml:_CurveSegment" /> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


58  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 
An ArcString is a curve segment that uses three-point circular arc interpolation. 


GML supports two different ways to specify the control points of a curve segment. 


 A sequence of "pos" (DirectPositionType) or "pointProperty" (PointPropertyType) elements. "pos" 
elements are control points that are only part of this curve segment, "pointProperty" elements contain 
a point that may be referenced from other geometry elements or reference another point defined 
outside of this curve segment (reuse of existing points). 


 The "posList" element allows for a compact way to specify the coordinates of the control points, if all 
control points are in the same coordinate reference systems and belong to this curve segment only. 
The number of direct positions in the coordinate list shall be at least three and include the start and 
end point. 


The attribute "interpolation" specifies the curve interpolation mechanism used for this segment. This 
mechanism uses the control points and control parameters to determine the position of this curve segment. 
For an ArcString the interpolation is fixed as "circularArc3Points". 


The number of arcs in the arc string can be explicitly stated in the attribute numArc. The number of control 
points in the arc string shall be 2 * numArc + 1. 


The use of the element coordinates is deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use posList instead. 


The use of the elements coord is deprecated. Use "pos" instead, the element is included only for backwards 
compatibility with previous versions of GML. 


10.2.1.7 gml:ArcType, gml:Arc 


 <complexType name="ArcType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:ArcStringType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <choice> 
      <choice minOccurs="3" maxOccurs="3"> 
       <element ref="gml:pos" /> 
       <element ref="gml:pointProperty" /> 
       <element ref="gml:pointRep" /> 
      </choice> 
      <element ref="gml:posList" /> 
      <element ref="gml:coordinates" /> 
     </choice> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute name="numArc" type="integer" use="optional" fixed="1" /> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
 <element name="Arc" type="gml:ArcType" substitutionGroup="gml:ArcString" /> 
 
An Arc is an arc string with only one arc unit, i.e. three control points. 


GML supports two different ways to specify the control points of a curve segment. 


 A sequence of "pos" (DirectPositionType) or "pointProperty" (PointPropertyType) elements. "pos" 
elements are control points that are only part of this curve segment, "pointProperty" elements contain 
a point that may be referenced from other geometry elements or reference another point defined 
outside of this curve segment (reuse of existing points). 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 59 
 


 


 The "posList" element allows for a compact way to specify the coordinates of the control points, if all 
control points are in the same coordinate reference systems and belong to this curve segment only. 
The number of direct positions in the coordinate list shall be three and include the start and end point. 


An arc is an arc string consisting of a single arc, the attribute numArc is fixed to "1". 


The use of the element coordinates is deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use posList instead. 


The use of the elements coord is deprecated. Use "pos" instead, the element is included only for backwards 
compatibility with previous versions of GML. 


10.2.1.8 gml:CircleType, gml:Circle 


 <complexType name="CircleType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:ArcType" /> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
 <element name="Circle" type="gml:CircleType" substitutionGroup="gml:Arc" /> 
 
A Circle is an arc whose ends coincide to form a simple closed loop. The "start" and "end" bearing are equal 
and shall be the bearing for the first controlPoint listed. The three control points shall be distinct non-co-linear 
points for the Circle to be unambiguously defined. The arc is simply extended past the third control point until 
the first control point is encountered. 


10.2.1.9 gml:ArcStringByBulgeType, gml:ArcStringByBulge 


 <complexType name="ArcStringByBulgeType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCurveSegmentType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <choice> 
      <choice minOccurs="2" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
       <element ref="gml:pos" /> 
       <element ref="gml:pointProperty" /> 
       <element ref="gml:pointRep" /> 
      </choice> 
      <element ref="gml:posList" /> 
      <element ref="gml:coordinates" /> 
     </choice> 
     <element name="bulge" type="gml:double" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element name="normal" type="gml:VectorType" maxOccurs="unbounded" /> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute name="interpolation" type="gml:CurveInterpolationType"  
     fixed="circularArc2PointWithBulge" /> 
    <attribute name="numArc" type="integer" use="optional" /> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
 <element name="ArcStringByBulge" type="gml:ArcStringByBulgeType" substitutionGroup="gml:_CurveSegment" /> 
 
This variant of the arc computes the mid points of the arcs instead of storing the coordinates directly. The 
control point sequence consists of the start and end points of each arc plus the bulge. 


GML supports two different ways to specify the control points of a curve segment. 


 A sequence of "pos" (DirectPositionType) or "pointProperty" (PointPropertyType) elements. "pos" 
elements are control points that are only part of this curve segment, "pointProperty" elements contain 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


60  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


a point that may be referenced from other geometry elements or reference another point defined 
outside of this curve segment (reuse of existing points). 


 The "posList" element allows for a compact way to specify the coordinates of the control points, if all 
control points are in the same coordinate reference systems and belong to this curve segment only. 
The number of direct positions in the coordinate list shall be at least two and include the start and end 
point. 


The element bulge controls the offset of each arc's midpoint. The "bulge" is the real number multiplier for the 
normal that determines the offset direction of the midpoint of each arc. The length of the bulge sequence is 
exactly 1 less than the length of the control point array, since a bulge is needed for each pair of adjacent 
points in the control point array. The bulge is not given by a distance, since it is simply a multiplier for the 
normal. 


The midpoint of the resulting arc is given by: midPoint = ((startPoint + endPoint)/2.0) + bulge*normal. 


The element "normal" is a vector normal (perpendicular) to the chord of the arc, the line joining the first and 
last point of the arc. In a 2D coordinate system, there are only two possible directions for the normal, and it is 
often given as a signed real, indicating its length, with a positive sign indicating a left turn angle from the chord 
line, and a negative sign indicating a right turn from the chord. In 3D, the normal determines the plane of the 
arc, along with the start and endPoint of the arc. 


The normal is usually a unit vector, but this is not absolutely necessary. If the normal is a zero vector, the 
geometric object becomes equivalent to the straight line between the two end points. The length of the normal 
sequence is exactly the same as for the bulge sequence, 1 less than the control point sequence length. 


The attribute "interpolation" specifies the curve interpolation mechanism used for this segment. This 
mechanism uses the control points and control parameters to determine the position of this curve segment. 
For an ArcStringByBulge the interpolation is fixed as "circularArc2PointWithBulge". 


The number of arcs in the arc string can be explicitly stated in the attribute numArc. The number of control 
points in the arc string shall be numArc + 1. 


The use of the element coordinates is deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use posList instead. 


The use of the elements coord is deprecated. Use "pos" instead, the element is included only for backwards 
compatibility with previous versions of GML. 


10.2.1.10 gml:ArcByBulgeType, gml:ArcByBulge 


 <complexType name="ArcByBulgeType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:ArcStringByBulgeType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <choice> 
      <choice minOccurs="2" maxOccurs="2"> 
       <element ref="gml:pos" /> 
       <element ref="gml:pointProperty" /> 
       <element ref="gml:pointRep" /> 
      </choice> 
      <element ref="gml:posList" /> 
      <element ref="gml:coordinates" /> 
     </choice> 
     <element name="bulge" type="gml:double" /> 
     <element name="normal" type="gml:VectorType"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute name="numArc" type="integer" use="optional" fixed="1" /> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 61 
 


 


 <element name="ArcByBulge" type="gml:ArcByBulgeType" substitutionGroup="gml:ArcStringByBulge" /> 
 
An ArcByBulge is an arc string with only one arc unit, i.e. two control points and one bulge. 


GML supports two different ways to specify the control points of a curve segment. 


 A sequence of "pos" (DirectPositionType) or "pointProperty" (PointPropertyType) elements. "pos" 
elements are control points that are only part of this curve segment, "pointProperty" elements contain 
a point that may be referenced from other geometry elements or reference another point defined 
outside of this curve segment (reuse of existing points). 


 The "posList" element allows for a compact way to specify the coordinates of the control points, if all 
control points are in the same coordinate reference systems and belong to this curve segment only. 
The number of direct positions in the coordinate list shall be two and include the start and end point. 


The element bulge controls the offset of each arc's midpoint. The "bulge" is the real number multiplier for the 
normal that determines the offset direction of the midpoint of each arc. The length of the bulge sequence is 
exactly 1 less than the length of the control point array, since a bulge is needed for each pair of adjacent 
points in the control point array. The bulge is not given by a distance, since it is simply a multiplier for the 
normal. 


The midpoint of the resulting arc is given by: midPoint = ((startPoint + endPoint)/2.0) + bulge*normal. 


For an Arc there is exactly one bulge. 


The element "normal" is a vector normal (perpendicular) to the chord of the arc, the line joining the first and 
last point of the arc. In a 2D coordinate system, there are only two possible directions for the normal, and it is 
often given as a signed real, indicating its length, with a positive sign indicating a left turn angle from the chord 
line, and a negative sign indicating a right turn from the chord. In 3D, the normal determines the plane of the 
arc, along with the start and endPoint of the arc. 


The normal is usually a unit vector, but this is not absolutely necessary. If the normal is a zero vector, the 
geometric object becomes equivalent to the straight line between the two end points. The length of the normal 
sequence is exactly the same as for the bulge sequence, 1 less than the control point sequence length. 


For an Arc there is exactly one normal vector. 


An arc is an arc string consisting of a single arc, the attribute numArc is fixed to "1". 


The use of the element coordinates is deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use posList instead. 


The use of the elements coord is deprecated. Use "pos" instead, the element is included only for backwards 
compatibility with previous versions of GML. 


10.2.1.11 gml:ArcByCenterPointType, gml:ArcByCenterPoint 


 <complexType name="ArcByCenterPointType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCurveSegmentType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <choice> 
      <choice> 
       <element ref="gml:pos" /> 
       <element ref="gml:pointProperty" /> 
       <element ref="gml:pointRep" /> 
      </choice> 
      <element ref="gml:posList" /> 
      <element ref="gml:coordinates" /> 
     </choice> 
     <element name="radius" type="gml:LengthType" /> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


62  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


     <element name="startAngle" type="gml:AngleType" minOccurs="0" /> 
     <element name="endAngle" type="gml:AngleType" minOccurs="0" /> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute name="interpolation" type="gml:CurveInterpolationType" 
     fixed="circularArcCenterPointWithRadius" /> 
    <attribute name="numArc" type="integer" use="required" fixed="1" /> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
 <element name="ArcByCenterPoint" type="gml:ArcByCenterPointType" substitutionGroup="gml:_CurveSegment" /> 
 


This variant of the arc requires that the points on the arc have to be computed instead of storing the 
coordinates directly. The control point is the center point of the arc plus the radius and the bearing at start and 
end. This representation can be used only in 2D. 


GML supports two different ways to specify the control points of a curve segment. 


 A "pos" (DirectPositionType) or "pointProperty" (PointPropertyType) element. The "pos" element 
contains a center point that is only part of this curve segment, a "pointProperty" element contains a 
point that may be referenced from other geometry elements or reference another point defined 
outside of this curve segment (reuse of existing points). 


 The "posList" element can be used to specify the coordinates of the center point, too. The number of 
direct positions in the coordinate list shall be one. 


The element radius specifies the radius of the arc. 


The element startAngle specifies the bearing of the arc at the start. 


The element endAngle specifies the bearing of the arc at the end. 


The attribute "interpolation" specifies the curve interpolation mechanism used for this segment. This 
mechanism uses the control points and control parameters to determine the position of this curve segment. 
For an ArcByCenterPoint the interpolation is fixed as "circularArcCenterPointWithRadius". 


Since this type describes always a single arc, the attribute numArc is fixed to "1". 


The use of the element coordinates is deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use posList instead. 


The use of the elements coord is deprecated. Use "pos" instead, the element is included only for backwards 
compatibility with previous versions of GML. 


10.2.1.12 gml:CircleByCenterPointType, gml:CircleByCenterPoint 


 <complexType name="CircleByCenterPointType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:ArcByCenterPointType" /> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
 <element name="CircleByCenterPoint" type="gml:CircleByCenterPointType"  
 substitutionGroup="gml:ArcByCenterPoint" /> 
 


A CircleByCenterPoint is an ArcByCenterPoint with identical start and end angle to form a full circle. Again, 
this representation can be used only in 2D. 


10.2.1.13 gml:CubicSplineType, gml:CubicSpline 


 <complexType name="CubicSplineType"> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 63 
 


 


  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCurveSegmentType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <choice> 
      <choice minOccurs="2" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
       <element ref="gml:pos" /> 
       <element ref="gml:pointProperty" /> 
       <element ref="gml:pointRep" /> 
      </choice> 
      <element ref="gml:posList" /> 
      <element ref="gml:coordinates" /> 
     </choice> 
     <element name="vectorAtStart" type="gml:VectorType" /> 
     <element name="vectorAtEnd" type="gml:VectorType" /> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute name="interpolation" type="gml:CurveInterpolationType" fixed="cubicSpline" /> 
    <attribute name="degree" type="integer" fixed="3" /> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
 <element name="CubicSpline" type="gml:CubicSplineType" substitutionGroup="gml:_CurveSegment" /> 
 
Cubic splines are similar to line strings in that they are a sequence of segments each with its own defining 
function. A cubic spline uses the control points and a set of derivative parameters to define a piecewise 3rd 
degree polynomial interpolation. Unlike line-strings, the parameterization by arc length is not necessarily still a 
polynomial.  


The function describing the curve shall be C2, that is, have a continuous 1st and 2nd derivative at all points, 
and pass through the controlPoints in the order given. Between the control points, the curve segment is 
defined by a cubic polynomial. At each control point, the polynomial changes in such a manner that the 1st 
and 2nd derivative vectors are the same from either side. The control parameters record shall contain 
vectorAtStart, and vectorAtEnd which are the unit tangent vectors at controlPoint[1] and controlPoint[n] where 
n = controlPoint.count.  


NOTE Only the direction of the vectors is relevant, not their length. 


GML supports two different ways to specify the control points of a curve segment. 


 A sequence of "pos" (DirectPositionType) or "pointProperty" (PointPropertyType) elements. "pos" 
elements are control points that are only part of this curve segment, "pointProperty" elements contain 
a point that may be referenced from other geometry elements or reference another point defined 
outside of this curve segment (reuse of existing points). 


 The "posList" element allows for a compact way to specify the coordinates of the control points, if all 
control points are in the same coordinate reference systems and belong to this curve segment only. 
The number of direct positions in the coordinate list shall be at least three and include the start and 
end point. 


The element vectorAtStart is the unit tangent vector at the start point of the spline. 


The element vectorAtEnd is the unit tangent vector at the end point of the spline. 


The attribute "interpolation" specifies the curve interpolation mechanism used for this segment. This 
mechanism uses the control points and control parameters to determine the position of this curve segment. 
For a CubicSpline the interpolation is fixed as "cubicSpline". 


The attribute "degree" shall be the degree of the polynomial used for interpolation in this spline. Therefore the 
degree for a cubic spline is fixed to "3". 


The use of the element coordinates is deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use posList instead. 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


64  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


The use of the elements coord is deprecated. Use "pos" instead, the element is included only for backwards 
compatibility with previous versions of GML. 


10.2.1.14 gml:BSplineType, gml:BSpline 


 <complexType name="BSplineType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCurveSegmentType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <choice> 
      <choice minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
       <element ref="gml:pos" /> 
       <element ref="gml:pointProperty" /> 
       <element ref="gml:pointRep" /> 
      </choice> 
      <element ref="gml:posList" /> 
      <element ref="gml:coordinates" /> 
     </choice> 
     <element name="degree" type="nonNegativeInteger" /> 
     <element name="knot" type="gml:KnotPropertyType" minOccurs="2" maxOccurs="unbounded" 
/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute name="interpolation" type="gml:CurveInterpolationType" default="polynomialSpline" /> 
    <attribute name="isPolynomial" type="boolean" use="optional" /> 
    <attribute name="knotType" type="gml:KnotTypesType" use="optional" /> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
 <element name="BSpline" type="gml:BSplineType" substitutionGroup="gml:_CurveSegment" /> 
 
A B-Spline is a piecewise parametric polynomial or rational curve described in terms of control points and 
basis functions. Knots are breakpoints on the curve that connect its pieces.  


They are given as a non-decreasing sequence of real numbers. If the weights in the knots are equal then it is 
a polynomial spline. The degree is the algebraic degree of the basis functions.  


GML supports two different ways to specify the control points of a curve segment. 


 A sequence of "pos" (DirectPositionType) or "pointProperty" (PointPropertyType) elements. "pos" 
elements are control points that are only part of this curve segment, "pointProperty" elements contain 
a point that may be referenced from other geometry elements or reference another point defined 
outside of this curve segment (reuse of existing points). 


 The "posList" element allows for a compact way to specify the coordinates of the control points, if all 
control points are in the same coordinate reference systems and belong to this curve segment only.  


The property element "degree" shall be the degree of the polynomial used for interpolation in this spline. 


The property element "knot" shall be the sequence of distinct knots used to define the spline basis functions. 


The attribute "interpolation" specifies the curve interpolation mechanism used for this segment. This 
mechanism uses the control points and control parameters to determine the position of this curve segment. 
For a BSpline the interpolation can be either "polynomialSpline" or "rationalSpline", default is 
"polynomialSpline". 


The attribute isPolynomial is set to true if this is a polynomial spline. 


The attribute "knotType" gives the type of knot distribution used in defining this spline. This is for information 
only and is set according to the different construction-functions. 


The use of the element coordinates is deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use posList instead. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 65 
 


 


The use of the elements coord is deprecated. Use "pos" instead, the element is included only for backwards 
compatibility with previous versions of GML. 


10.2.1.15 gml:KnotType, gml:KnotPropertyType 


 <complexType name="KnotType"> 
  <sequence> 
   <element name="value" type="double" /> 
   <element name="multiplicity" type="nonNegativeInteger" /> 
   <element name="weight" type="double" /> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 
A knot is a breakpoint on a piecewise spline curve. 


The property element "value" is the value of the parameter at the knot of the spline. The sequence of knots 
shall be a non-decreasing sequence. That is, each knot's value in the sequence shall be equal to or greater 
than the previous knot's value. The use of equal consecutive knots is normally handled using the multiplicity. 


The property element "multiplicity" is the multiplicity of this knot used in the definition of the spline (with the 
same weight). 


The property element "weight" is the value of the averaging weight used for this knot of the spline. 


 <complexType name="KnotPropertyType"> 
  <sequence> 
   <element name="Knot" type="gml:KnotType" /> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 
Encapsulates a knot to use it in a geometric type. 


 


10.2.1.16 gml:KnotTypesType 


 <simpleType name="KnotTypesType"> 
  <restriction base="string"> 
   <enumeration value="uniform" /> 
   <enumeration value="quasiUniform" /> 
   <enumeration value="piecewiseBezier" /> 
  </restriction> 
 </simpleType> 
 
Defines allowed values for the knots` type. Uniform knots implies that all knots are of multiplicity 1 and they 
differ by a positive constant from the preceding knot. Knots are quasi-uniform if they are of multiplicity (degree 
+ 1) at the ends, of multiplicity 1 elsewhere, and they differ by a positive constant from the preceding knot. 


10.2.1.17 gml:BezierType, gml:Bezier 


 <complexType name="BezierType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:BSplineType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <choice> 
      <choice minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
       <element ref="gml:pos" /> 
       <element ref="gml:pointProperty" /> 
       <element ref="gml:pointRep" /> 
      </choice> 
      <element ref="gml:posList" /> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


66  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


      <element ref="gml:coordinates" /> 
     </choice> 
     <element name="degree" type="nonNegativeInteger" /> 
     <element name="knot" type="gml:KnotPropertyType" minOccurs="2" maxOccurs="2" /> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute name="interpolation" type="gml:CurveInterpolationType" fixed="polynomialSpline" /> 
    <attribute name="isPolynomial" type="boolean" fixed="true" /> 
    <attribute name="knotType" type="gml:KnotTypesType" use="prohibited" /> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
 <element name="Bezier" type="gml:BezierType" substitutionGroup="gml:BSpline" /> 
 
Bezier curves are polynomial splines that use Bezier or Bernstein polynomials for interpolation purposes. It is 
a special case of the B-Spline curve with two knots. 


GML supports two different ways to specify the control points of a curve segment. 


 A sequence of "pos" (DirectPositionType) or "pointProperty" (PointPropertyType) elements. "pos" 
elements are control points that are only part of this curve segment, "pointProperty" elements contain 
a point that may be referenced from other geometry elements or reference another point defined 
outside of this curve segment (reuse of existing points). 


 The "posList" element allows for a compact way to specify the coordinates of the control points, if all 
control points are in the same coordinate reference systems and belong to this curve segment only. 


The property element "degree" shall be the degree of the polynomial used for interpolation in this spline. 


The property element "knot" shall be the sequence of distinct knots used to define the spline basis functions. 


The attribute "interpolation" specifies the curve interpolation mechanism used for this segment. This 
mechanism uses the control points and control parameters to determine the position of this curve segment. 
For a Bezier the interpolation is fixed as "polynomialSpline". 


The attribute isPolynomial shall be true as this is a polynomial spline. 


The property "knotType" is not relevant for Bezier curve segments. 


The use of the element coordinates is deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use posList instead. 


The use of the elements coord is deprecated. Use "pos" instead, the element is included only for backwards 
compatibility with previous versions of GML. 


10.2.1.18 gml:OrientableCurveType, gml:OrientableCurve, gml:baseCurve 


 <complexType name="OrientableCurveType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCurveType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:baseCurve" /> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute name="orientation" type="gml:SignType" default="+" /> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
 <element name="baseCurve" type="gml:CurvePropertyType" /> 
 
 <element name="OrientableCurve" type="gml:OrientableCurveType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Curve" /> 
 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 67 
 


 


OrientableCurve consists of a curve and an orientation. If the orientation is "+", then the OrientableCurve is 
identical to the baseCurve. If the orientation is "-", then the OrientableCurve is related to another _Curve with 
a parameterization that reverses the sense of the curve traversal. 


The element baseCurve references or contains the base curve. The property baseCurve either references 
the base curve via the XLink-attributes or contains the curve element. A curve element is any element which is 
substitutable for "_Curve". The base curve has positive orientation. 


NOTE This definition allows for a nested structure, i.e. an OrientableCurve may use another OrientableCurve as its 
base curve. 


If the attribute orientation is "+", then the OrientableCurve is identical to the baseCurve. If the orientation is "-
", then the OrientableCurve is related to another _Curve with a parameterization that reverses the sense of 
the curve traversal. "+" is the default value. 


10.2.1.19 gml:OffsetCurveType, gml:OffsetCurve 


<complexType name="OffsetCurveType"> 
 <complexContent> 
  <extension base="gml:AbstractCurveSegmentType"> 
 <sequence> 
       <element name="offsetBase" type="gml:CurvePropertyType"/> 
       <element name="distance" type="gml:LengthType"/> 
       <element name="refDirection" type="gml:VectorType" minOccurs="0"/> 
 </sequence> 
    </extension> 


</complexContent> 
</complexType> 
  
<element name="OffsetCurve" type="gml:OffsetCurveType" substitutionGroup="gml:_CurveSegment"/> 
 
An offset curve is a curve at a constant distance from the basis curve. Offsets can be useful as cheap and 
simple alternatives to constructing curves that are offsets by definition. 


OffsetBase is a reference to the curve from which this curve is defined as an offset. 


Distance is the distance at which the offset curve is generated from the basis curve. In 2D systems, positive 
distances are to be to the left of the basis curve, and the negative distances are to be to the right of the basis 
curve. 


refDistance is used to define the vector direction of the offset curve from the basis curve. It can be omitted in 
the 2D case, where the distance can be positive or negative. In that case, distance defines left side (positive 
distance) or right side (negative distance) with respect to the tangent to the basis curve. 


In 3D, the basis curve shall have a well defined tangent direction for every point. The offset curve at any point 
in 3D, the basis curve shall have a well-defined tangent direction for every point. The offset curve at any point 
(parameter) on the basis curve c is in the direction 


 


For the offset direction to be well-defined, v shall not on any point of the curve be in the same, or opposite, 
direction as t. 


The default value of the refDirection shall be the local co-ordinate axis vector for elevation, which indicates up 
for the curve in a geographic sense. 


NOTE If the refDirection is the positive tangent to the local elevation axis ("points upward"), then the offset vector 
points to the left of the curve when viewed from above. 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


68  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


10.2.1.20 gml:AffinePlacementType, gml:AffinePlacement 


<complexType name="AffinePlacementType">   
 <sequence> 
 <element name="location" type="gml:DirectPositionType"/> 
 <element name="refDirection" type="gml:VectorType" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
 <element name="inDimension" type="positiveInteger"/> 
 <element name="outDimension" type="positiveInteger"/> 
 </sequence> 
</complexType> 
  
<element name="AffinePlacement" type="AffinePlacementType"/> 
  
A placement takes a standard geometric construction and places it in geographic space. It defines a 
transformation from a constructive parameter space to the co-ordinate space of the co-ordinate reference 
system being used. Parameter spaces in formulae in this International Standard are given as (u, v) in 2D 
and(u, v, w) in 3D. Co-ordinate reference systems positions are given in formulae, in this International 
Standard, by either (x, y) in 2D, or (x, y, z) in 3D. 


Affine placements are defined by linear transformations from parameter space to the target co-ordiante space. 
2-dimensional Cartesian parameter space,(u,v) transforms into 3-dimensional co-ordinate reference systems
 ,(x,y,z) by using an affine transformation,(u,v)->(x,y,z) which is defined: 


 


Then, given this equation, the location element of the AffinePlacement is the direct position (x0, y0, z0), which 
is the target position of the origin in (u, v). The two reference directions (ux, uy, uz) and (vx, vy, vz) are the 
target directions of the unit vectors at the origin in (u, v). 


The location property gives the target of the parameter space origin. This is the vector (x0, y0, z0) in the 
formulae above. 


The attribute refDirection gives the target directions for the co-ordinate basis vectors of the  parameter 
space. These are the columns of the matrix in the formulae given above. The number of directions given shall 
be inDimension. The dimension of the directions shall be outDimension. 


10.2.1.21 gml:ClothoidType, gml:Clothoid 


<complexType name="ClothoidType"> 
 <complexContent> 
 <extension base="gml:AbstractCurveSegmentType"> 
 <sequence> 
 <element name="refLocation"> 
 <complexType> 


   <sequence> 
 <element ref="gml:AffinePlacement"/> 
 </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 </element> 
 <element name="scaleFactor" type="decimal"/> 
 <element name="startParameter" type="double"/> 
 <element name="endParameter" type="double"/> 
 </sequence> 
 </extension> 
 </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
  
<element name="Clothoid" type="gml:ClothoidType" substitutionGroup="gml:_CurveSegment"/> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 69 
 


 


 


A clothoid, or Cornu's spiral, is plane curve whose curvature is a fixed function of its length. In suitably chosen 
co-ordinates it is given by Fresnel's integrals: 


 


This geometry is mainly used as a transition curve between curves of type straight line to circular arc or 
circular arc to circular arc. With this curve type it is possible to achieve a C2-continous transition between the 
above mentioned curve types. One formula for the clothoid is A*A = R*t where A is a constant, R is the 
varying radius of curvature along the curve and t is the length along the curve and given in the Fresnel 
integrals.  


The "refLocation" is an affine mapping that places the curve defined by the Fresnel Integrals into the co-
ordinate reference system of this object. 


The startParameter is the arc length distance from the inflection point that will be the start point for this curve 
segment. This shall be lower limit used in the Fresnel integral and is the value of the constructive parameter of 
this curve segment at its start point. The startParameter can either be positive or negative. 


NOTE If 0.0 (zero), lies between the startParameter and the endParameter of the clothoid, then the curve goes 
through the clothoid's inflection point, and the direction of its radius of curvature, given by the second derivative vector, 
changes sides with respect to the tangent vector. The term length distance for the parameter t is applicable only in the 
parameter space and its relation to arc length after use of the placement, and with respect to the co-ordinate reference 
system of the curve is not deterministic. 


The endParameter is the arc length distance from the inflection point that will be the end point for this curve 
segment. This shall be upper limit used in the Fresnel integral and is the value of the constructive parameter 
of this curve segment at its start point. The startParameter can either be positive or negative. 


10.2.1.22 gml:GeodesicStringType, gml:GeodesicSting 


<complexType name="GeodesicStringType"> 
 <complexContent> 
 <extension base="gml:AbstractCurveSegmentType"> 
    <choice> 
     <element ref="gml:posList"/> 
     <group ref="gml:geometricPositionGroup" minOccurs="2" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
    </choice> 
    <attribute name="interpolation" type="gml:CurveInterpolationType" fixed="geodesic"> 
 </extension> 
 </complexContent> 
</complexType> 
  
<element name="GeodesicString" type="gml:GeodesicStringType" substitutionGroup="gml:_CurveSegment"/> 
 


A GeodesicString consists of sequence of geodesic segments. The type essentially combines a sequence of 
Geodesic into a single object. The GeodesicString is computed from two or more positions and an 
interpolation using geodesics defined from the geoid (or ellipsoid) of the co-ordinate reference system being 
used. 


GML supports two different ways to specify the control points of a curve segment. 


A sequence of pos (DirectPositionType) or pointProperty (PointPropertyType) elements. pos elements 
are control points that are only part of this curve segement, pointProperty elements contain a point that may 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


70  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


be referenced from other geometry elements or reference another point defined outside of this curve segment 
(reuse of existing points). 


The posList element allows for a compact way to specify the coordinates of the control points, if all control 
points are in the same coordinate reference systems and belong to this curve segment only. 


The number of direct positions in the list shall be at least two. 


The attribute "interpolation" specifies the curve interpolation mechanism used for this segment. This 
mechanism uses the control points and control parameters to determine the position of this curve segment. 
For an GeodesicString the interpolation is fixed as "geodesic". 


10.2.1.23 gml:GeodesicType, gml:Geodesic 


<complexType name="GeodesicType"> 
 <complexContent> 
 <extension base="gml:GeodesicStringType"/> 
 </complexContent> 
</complexType> 
  
<element name="Geodesic" type="gml:GeodesicType" substitutionGroup="gml:GeodesicString"/> 
 
A Geodesic consists of two distinct positions joined by a geodesic curve. The control points of a Geodesic 
shall lie on the geodesic between its start point and end points. Between these two points, a geodesic curve 
defined from ellipsoid or geoid model used by the co-ordinate reference systems may be used to interpolate 
other positions. Any other point in the controlPoint array shall fall on this geodesic. 


10.2.2 2-dimensional geometric primitives 


10.2.2.1 gml:SurfaceType, gml:Surface 


 <complexType name="SurfaceType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractSurfaceType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:patches" /> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
 <element name="Surface" type="gml:SurfaceType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Surface" /> 
 
A Surface is a 2-dimensional primitive and is composed of one or more surface patches. The surface patches 
are connected to one another. 


The orientation of the surface is positive ("up"). The orientation of a surface chooses an "up" direction through 
the choice of the upward normal, which, if the surface is not a cycle, is the side of the surface from which the 
exterior boundary appears counterclockwise. Reversal of the surface orientation reverses the curve 
orientation of each boundary component, and interchanges the conceptual "up" and "down" direction of the 
surface. If the surface is the boundary of a solid, the "up" direction is usually outward. For closed surfaces, 
which have no boundary, the up direction is that of the surface patches, which shall be consistent with one 
another. Its included surface patches describe the interior structure of the Surface. 


The element patches encapsulates the patches of the surface. 


10.2.2.2 gml:AbstractSurfacePatchType, gml :_SurfacePatch 


 <complexType name="AbstractSurfacePatchType" abstract="true" /> 
 
A surface patch defines a homogenuous portion of a surface. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 71 
 


 


 <element name="_SurfacePatch" type="gml:AbstractSurfacePatchType" abstract="true" /> 
 
The "_SurfacePatch" element is the abstract head of the substituition group for all surface patch elements 
describing a continuous portion of a surface. 


10.2.2.3 gml:SurfacePatchArrayPropertyType, gml:patches 


 <complexType name="SurfacePatchArrayPropertyType"> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:_SurfacePatch"  minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded" /> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 
A container for an array of surface patches. 


 <element name="patches" type="gml:SurfacePatchArrayPropertyType" /> 
 
This property element contains a list of surface patches. The order of the elements is significant and shall be 
preserved when processing the array. 


10.2.2.4 gml:SurfaceInterpolationType 


 <simpleType name="SurfaceInterpolationType"> 
  <restriction base="string"> 
   <enumeration value="none" /> 
   <enumeration value="planar" /> 
   <enumeration value="spherical" /> 
   <enumeration value="elliptical" /> 
   <enumeration value="conic" /> 
   <enumeration value="tin" /> 
   <enumeration value="parametricCurve" /> 
   <enumeration value="polynomialSpline" /> 
   <enumeration value="rationalSpline" /> 
   <enumeration value="triangulatedSpline" /> 
  </restriction> 
 </simpleType> 
 
SurfaceInterpolationType is a list of codes that may be used to identify the interpolation mechanisms specified 
by an application schema. 


10.2.2.5 gml:PolygonPatchType 


 <complexType name="PolygonPatchType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractSurfacePatchType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:exterior" minOccurs="0" /> 
     <element ref="gml:interior" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded" /> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute name="interpolation" type="gml:SurfaceInterpolationType" fixed="planar" /> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
 <element name="PolygonPatch" type="gml:PolygonPatchType" substitutionGroup="gml:_SurfacePatch" /> 
 
A PolygonPatch is a surface patch that is defined by a set of boundary curves and an underlying surface to 
which these curves adhere. The curves are coplanar and the polygon uses planar interpolation in its interior. 
Implements GM_Polygon of ISO 19107.  







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


72  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


The attribute "interpolation" specifies the interpolation mechanism used for this surface patch. Currently only 
planar surface patches are defined in GML 3, the attribute is fixed to "planar", i.e. the interpolation method 
shall return points on a single plane. The boundary of the patch shall be contained within that plane. 


10.2.2.6 gml:TriangleType, gml:Triangle 


 <complexType name="TriangleType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractSurfacePatchType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:exterior" /> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute name="interpolation" type="gml:SurfaceInterpolationType" fixed="planar" /> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
 <element name="Triangle" type="gml:TriangleType" substitutionGroup="gml:_SurfacePatch" /> 
 
Represents a triangle as a surface with an outer boundary consisting of a linear ring. Note that this is a 
polygon (subtype) with no inner boundaries. The number of points in the linear ring shall be four. 


The Ring (element exterior) shall be a LinearRing and shall form a triangle, the first and the last position 
shall be co-incident. 


The attribute "interpolation" specifies the interpolation mechanism used for this surface patch. Currently only 
planar surface patches are defined in GML 3, the attribute is fixed to "planar", i.e. the interpolation method 
shall return points on a single plane. The boundary of the patch shall be contained within that plane. 


10.2.2.7 gml:RectangleType, gml:Rectangle 


 <complexType name="RectangleType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractSurfacePatchType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:exterior" /> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute name="interpolation" type="gml:SurfaceInterpolationType" fixed="planar" /> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
 <element name="Rectangle" type="gml:RectangleType" substitutionGroup="gml:_SurfacePatch" /> 
 
Represents a rectangle as a surface with an outer boundary consisting of a linear ring. Note that this is a 
polygon (subtype) with no inner boundaries. The number of points in the linear ring shall be five. 


The Ring (element exterior) shall be a LinearRing and shall form a rectangle; the first and the last position 
shall be co-incident. 


The attribute "interpolation" specifies the interpolation mechanism used for this surface patch. Currently only 
planar surface patches are defined in GML 3, the attribute is fixed to "planar", i.e. the interpolation method 
shall return points on a single plane. The boundary of the patch shall be contained within that plane. 


10.2.2.8 gml:RingType 


 <complexType name="RingType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractRingType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:curveMember" maxOccurs="unbounded" /> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 73 
 


 


    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
 <element name="Ring" type="gml:RingType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Ring" /> 
 
 <element name="curveMember" type="gml:CurvePropertyType" /> 
 
A Ring is used to represent a single connected component of a surface boundary. It consists of a sequence of 
curves connected in a cycle (an object whose boundary is empty). 


A Ring is structurally similar to a composite curve in that the endPoint of each curve in the sequence is the 
startPoint of the next curve in the Sequence. Since the sequence is circular, there is no exception to this rule. 
Each ring, like all boundaries, is a cycle and each ring is simple. 


NOTE Even though each Ring is simple, the boundary need not be simple. The easiest case of this is where one of 
the interior rings of a surface is tangent to its exterior ring. 


The element curveMember references or contains one curve in the composite curve. The curves are 
contiguous, the collection of curves is ordered. 


NOTE This definition allows for a nested structure, i.e. a CompositeCurve may use, for example, another 
CompositeCurve as a curve member. 


This property element either references a curve via the XLink-attributes or contains the curve element. A 
curve element is any element which is substitutable for "gml:_Curve". 


The element is used, for example, in a Ring. 


10.2.2.9 gml:RingPropertyType 


 <complexType name="RingPropertyType"> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:Ring" /> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 
Encapsulates a ring to represent properties in features or geometry collections.  


10.2.2.10 gml:OrientableSurfaceType, gml:OrientableSurface, gml:baseSurface 


 <complexType name="OrientableSurfaceType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractSurfaceType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:baseSurface" /> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute name="orientation" type="gml:SignType" default="+" /> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
 <element name="baseSurface" type="gml:SurfacePropertyType" /> 
 
 <element name="OrientableSurface" type="gml:OrientableSurfaceType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Surface" /> 
 
OrientableSurface consists of a surface and an orientation. If the orientation is "+", then the OrientableSurface 
is identical to the baseSurface. If the orientation is "-", then the OrientableSurface is a reference to a Surface 
with an up-normal that reverses the direction for this OrientableSurface, the sense of "the top of the surface". 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


74  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


The element baseSurface references or contains the base surface. The property baseSurface either 
references the base surface via the XLink-attributes or contains the surface element. A surface element is any 
element which is substitutable for "gml:_Surface". The base surface has positive orientation. 


NOTE This definition allows for a nested structure, i.e. an OrientableSurface may use another OrientableSurface as 
its base surface. 


If the attribute orientation is "+", then the OrientableSurface is identical to the baseSurface. If the orientation 
is "-", then the OrientableSurface is a reference to a Surface with an up-normal that reverses the direction for 
this OrientableSurface, the sense of "the top of the surface". "+" is the default value. 


10.2.2.11 gml:PointGrid 


<group name="PointGrid"> 
 <sequence> 
 <element name="row" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
 <complexType> 
     <sequence> 
      <group ref="gml:geometricPositionListGroup"/> 


</sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 </element> 
 </sequence> 
</group> 
 


Reference points which are organised into sequences or grids (sequences of equal length sequences). 


10.2.2.12 gml:AbstractParametricCurveSurfaceType, gml:_ParametricCurveSurface 


<complexType name="AbstractParametricCurveSurfaceType"> 
 <complexContent> 
  <extension base="gml:AbstractSurfacePatchType"/> 
  </complexContent> 
</complexType> 
  
<element name="_ParametricCurveSurface" type="gml:AbstractParametricCurveSurfaceType" abstract="true" 
substitutionGroup="gml:_SurfacePatch"/> 
 


The surface patches that make up the parametric curve surface are all continuous families of curves, given by 
a constructive function of the form: 


 


By fixing, the value of either parameter, we have a one-parameter family of curves. 


 


   Various possible pairs of types of parametric curve surfaces: 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 75 
 


 


 


The two partial derivatives of the surface parameterisation, i and j are given by: 


 


   and 


 


The default upNormal for the surface shall be the vector cross product of these two curve derivatives when 
they are both non-zero. 


   k=ixj 


If the co-ordinate reference system is 2D, then the vector k extends the local co-ordinate system by supplying 
an "upward" elevation vector. In this case the vector basis (i,j) shall be a right hand system, that is to say, the  
oriented angle from i to j shall be less than 180 degrees. This gives a right-handed "moving frame" of local co-
ordinate axes given by <i,j>. A moving frame is defined to be a continuous function from the geometric object 
to a basis for the local tangent space of that object. For curves, this is the derivative of the curve, the local 
tangent. For surfaces, this is a local pair of tangents. Parameterised curve surfaces have a natural moving 
frame and it shall be used as defined in this paragraph to define the upNormal of the surface. 


NOTE The existence of a viable moving frame is the definition of "orientable" manifold. This is why the existence of a 
continuous upNormal implies that the surface is orientable. Non-orientable surfaces, such <as the Mbius band and Klein 
bottle are counter-intuitive. These are forbidden for use in application schemas conforming to this international standard. 
Klein bottles cannot even be constructed in 3D space, but require 4D space for non-singular representations. 


10.2.2.13 gml:AbstractGriddedSurfaceType, gml:_GriddedSurface 


<complexType name="AbstractGriddedSurfaceType"> 
 <complexContent> 
 <extension base="gml:AbstractParametricCurveSurfaceType"> 
  <sequence> 
 <element name="rows" type="integer" minOccurs="0"/> 
 <element name="columns" type="integer" minOccurs="0"/> 
 <group ref="gml:PointGrid"/> 
 </sequence> 
 </extension> 
 </complexContent> 
</complexType> 
  
<element name="_GriddedSurface" type="gml:AbstractGriddedSurfaceType" abstract="true" 
substitutionGroup="gml:_ParametricCurveSurface"/> 
 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


76  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


A gridded surface is a parametric curve surface derived from a rectangular grid in the parameter space. The 
rows from this grid are control points for horizontal surface curves; the columns are control points for vertical 
surface curves. The working assumption is that for a pair of parametric co-ordinates (s, t) that the horizontal 
curves for each integer offset are calculated and evaluated at "s". This defines a sequence of control points: 


 


From this sequence a vertical curve is calculated for "s", and evaluated at "t". In most cases, the order of 
calculation (horizontal-vertical vs. vertical-horizontal) does not make a difference. Where it does, the 
horizontal-   vertical order shall be the one used. 


 


Logically, any pair of curve interpolation types can lead to a subtype of GriddedSurface. The following clauses 
define some most commonly encountered surfaces that can be represented in this manner.  


This is the double indexed sequence of control points, given in row major form.  


NOTE There in no assumption made about the shape of the grid. For example, the positions need not effect a 
"21/2D" surface, consecutive points may be equal in any or all of the ordinates. Further, the curves in either or both 
directions may close. 


The attribute "rows" gives the number of rows in the parameter grid.  


The attribute "columns" gives the number of columns in the parameter grid. 


10.2.2.14 gml:ConeType, gml:Cone 


<complexType name="ConeType"> 
 <complexContent> 
 <extension base="gml:AbstractGriddedSurfaceType"> 
 <attribute name="horizontalCurveType" type="gml:CurveInterpolationType"  
   fixed="circularArc3Points"/> 
 <attribute name="verticalCurveType" type="gml:CurveInterpolationType" fixed="linear"/> 
 </extension> 
 </complexContent> 
</complexType> 
  
<element name="Cone" type="gml:ConeType" substitutionGroup="gml:_GriddedSurface"/> 
 


A cone is a gridded surface given as a family of conic sections whose control points vary linearly. 


NOTE! A 5-point ellipse with all defining positions identical is a point. Thus, a truncated elliptical cone can be 
given as a 2x5 set of control points <<P1, P1, P1, P1, P1>, <P2, P3, P4, P5, P6>>. P1 is the apex of the 
cone. P2, P3, P4, P5 and P6 are any five distinct points around the base ellipse of the cone. If the horizontal 
curves are circles as opposed to ellipses, the circular cone can be constructed using <<P1, P1, P1>, <P2, P3, 
P4>>. 


10.2.2.15 gml:CylinderType, gmlCylinder 


<complexType name="CylinderType"> 
 <complexContent> 
  <extension base="gml:AbstractGriddedSurfaceType"> 


<attribute name="horizontalCurveType" type="gml:CurveInterpolationType"     
  fixed="circularArc3Points"/>  







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 77 
 


 


 <attribute name="verticalCurveType" type="gml:CurveInterpolationType" fixed="linear"/> 
   </extension> 
 </complexContent> 
</complexType> 
  
<element name="Cylinder" type="gml:CylinderType" substitutionGroup="gml:_GriddedSurface"/> 
 


A cylinder is a gridded surface given as a family of circles whose positions vary along a set of parallel lines, 
keeping the cross sectional horizontal curves of a constant shape. 


NOTE! Given the same working assumptions as in the previous note, a Cylinder can be given by two circles, 
giving us the control points of the form <<P1, P2, P3>,<P4, P5, P6>>. 


10.2.2.16 gml: SphereType, gml:Sphere 


<complexType name="SphereType"> 
 <complexContent> 
 <extension base="gml:AbstractGriddedSurfaceType"> 


<attribute name="horizontalCurveType" type="gml:CurveInterpolationType" 
fixed="circularArc3Points"/> 
attribute name="verticalCurveType" type="gml:CurveInterpolationType" fixed="circularArc3Points"/> 


 </extension> 
 </complexContent> 
</complexType> 
  
<element name="Sphere" type="gml:SphereType" substitutionGroup="gml:_GriddedSurface"/> 
 


A sphere is a gridded surface given as a family of circles whose positions vary linearly along the axis of the 
sphere, and whise radius varies in proportions to the cosine function of the central angle. The horizontal  
circles resemble lines of constant latitude, and the vertical arcs resemble lines of constant longitude.  


NOTE! If the control points are sorted in terms of increasing longitude, and increasing latitude, the upNormal 
of a sphere is the outward normal. 


EXAMPLE If we take a gridded set of latitudes and longitudes in degrees,(u,v) such as 


 


And map these points to 3D using the usual equations (where R is the radius of the required sphere). 


    z = R sin u 


    x = (R cos u)(sin v) 


    y = (R cos u)(cos v) 


We have a sphere of Radius R, centred at (0,0), as a gridded surface. Notice that the entire first row and the 
entire last row of the control points map to a single point in each 3D Euclidean space, North and South poles 
respectively, and that each horizontal curve closes back on itself forming a geometric cycle. This gives us a 
metrically bounded (of finite size), topologically unbounded (not having a boundary, a cycle) surface. 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


78  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


10.2.2.17 gml:PolyhedralSurfaceType, gml:PolyhedralSurface  


<complexType name="PolyhedralSurfaceType"> 
 <complexContent> 
 <restriction base="gml:SurfaceType"> 
 <sequence> 
 <group ref="gml:StandardObjectProperties"/> 
 <element ref="gml:polygonPatches"/> 
 </sequence> 
 </restriction> 
 </complexContent> 
</complexType> 
  
<element name="PolyhedralSurface" type="gml:PolyhedralSurfaceType" substitutionGroup="gml:Surface"/> 
 


A polyhedral surface is a surface composed of polygon surfaces connected along their common boundary 
curves. This differs from the surface type only in the restriction on the types of surface patches acceptable. 


 


This property encapsulates the patches of the polyhedral surface. 


10.2.2.18 gml:PolygonPatchArrayPropertyType, gml:PolygonPatches 


<complexType name="PolygonPatchArrayPropertyType"> 
 <complexContent> 
 <restriction base="gml:SurfacePatchArrayPropertyType"> 
 <sequence> 
 <element ref="gml:PolygonPatch" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
 </sequence> 
 </restriction> 
 </complexContent> 
</complexType> 
  
<element name="polygonPatches" type="gml:PolygonPatchArrayPropertyType" substitutionGroup="gml:patches"/> 
 


This type defines a container for an array of polygon patches. 


The property element contains a list of polygon patches. The order of the patches is significant and shall be 
preserved when processing the list. 


10.2.2.19 gml:TriangulatedSurfaceType, gml:TriangulatedSurface 


<complexType name="TrianglePatchArrayPropertyType"> 
 <complexContent> 
 <restriction base="gml:SurfacePatchArrayPropertyType"> 
 <sequence> 
 <element ref="gml:Triangle" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
 </sequence> 
 </restriction> 
 </complexContent> 
</complexType> 
  
<element name="trianglePatches" type="TrianglePatchArrayPropertyType" substitutionGroup="gml:patches"/> 
 


A triangulated surface is a polyhedral surface that is composed only of triangles. There is no restriction on 
how the triangulation is derived. 


The triangle patches property encapsulates the patches of the triangulated surface. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 79 
 


 


10.2.2.20 gml:TrianglePatchArrayPropertyType, gml:TrianglePatches 


<complexType name="TriangulatedSurfaceType"> 
 <complexContent> 
 <restriction base="gml:SurfaceType"> 
 <sequence> 
 <group ref="gml:StandardObjectProperties"/> 
 <element ref="gml:trianglePatches"/> 
 </sequence> 
 </restriction> 
 </complexContent> 
</complexType> 
  
<element name="TriangulatedSurface" type="gml:TriangulatedSurfaceType" substitutionGroup="gml:Surface"/> 
 


This type defines a container for an array of triangle patches. 


This property element contains a list of triangle patches. The order of the patches is significant and shall be 
preserved when processing the list. 


10.2.2.21 gml:TinType, gml:Tin 


<complexType name="TinType"> 
 <complexContent> 
 <extension base="gml:TriangulatedSurfaceType"> 
 <sequence> 
  <element name="stopLines" type="gml:LineStringSegmentArrayPropertyType"  
    minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
  <element name="breakLines" type="gml:LineStringSegmentArrayPropertyType"  
    minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
  <element name="maxLength" type="gml:LengthType"/> 
  <element name="controlPoint"> 
  <complexType> 
  <choice> 
 <element ref="gml:posList"/> 
 <group ref="gml:geometricPositionGroup"  
   minOccurs="3" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
 </choice> 
 </complexType> 
 </element> 
 </sequence> 
 </extension> 
 </complexContent> 
</complexType> 
  
<element name="Tin" type="gml:TinType" substitutionGroup="gml:TriangulatedSurface"/> 
 


A tin is a triangulated surface that uses the Delauny algorithm or a similar algorithm complemented with 
consideration of breaklines, stoplines, and maximum length of triangle sides. These networks satisfy the 
Delauny's criterion away from the modifications: Fore each triangle in the network, the circle passing through 
its vertices does not contain, in its interior, the vertex of any other triangle. 


 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


80  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 


Stoplines are lines where the local continuity or regularity of the surface is questionable. In the area of these 
pathologies, triangles intersecting a stopline shall be removed from the tin surface, leaving holes in the 
surface. If coincidence occurs on surface boundary triangles, the result shall be a change of the surface 
boundary. Stoplines contains all these pathological segments as a set of line strings. 


Breaklines are lines of a critical nature to the shape of the surface, representing local ridges, or depressions 
(such as drainage lines) in the surface. As such their constituent segments shall be included in the tin even if 
doing so violates the Delauny criterion. Break lines contains these critical segments as a set of line strings. 


Areas of the surface where data is not sufficiently dense to assure reasonable calculation shall be removed by 
adding a retention criterion for triangles based on the length of their sides. For many triangle sides exceeding 
maximum length, the adjacent triangles to that triangle side shall be removed from the surface. 


The corners of the triangles in the TIN are often referred to as pots. ControlPoint shall contain a set of the 
positions used as posts for this TIN. Since each TIN contains triangles, there shall be at least 3 posts. The 
order in which these points are given does not affect the surface that is represented. Application schemas 
may add information based on ordering of control points to facilitate the reconstruction of the TIN from the 
control points. 


10.2.2.22 gml:LineStringSegmentArrayPropertyType 


<complexType name="LineStringSegmentArrayPropertyType"> 
 <sequence> 
 <element ref="gml:LineStringSegment" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
 </sequence> 
</complexType>  
 


10.2.3 3-dimensional geometric primitives 


10.2.3.1 gml:AbstractSolidType, gml:_Solid 


 <complexType name="AbstractSolidType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGeometricPrimitiveType" /> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 81 
 


 


An abstraction of a solid to support the different levels of complexity. A solid is always contiguous. 


 <element name="_Solid" type="gml:AbstractSolidType" abstract="true"  
 substitutionGroup="gml:_GeometricPrimitive" /> 
 
The "_Solid" element is the abstract head of the substituition group for all (continuous) solid elements. 


10.2.3.2 gml:SolidPropertyType, gml:solidProperty 


 <complexType name="SolidPropertyType"> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:_Solid"  minOccurs="0" /> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup" /> 
 </complexType> 
 
A property that has a solid as its value domain can either be an appropriate geometry element encapsulated 
in an element of this type or an XLink reference to a remote geometry element (where remote includes 
geometry elements located elsewhere in the same document). Either the reference or the contained element 
shall be given, but neither both nor none. 


 <element name="solidProperty" type="gml:SolidPropertyType" /> 
 
This property element either references a solid via the XLink-attributes or contains the solid element. 
solidProperty is the predefined property which can be used by GML Application Schemas whenever a GML 
Feature has a property with a value that is substitutable for _Solid. 


 


10.2.3.3 gml:SolidArrayPropertyType, gml:solidArrayProperty 


 <complexType name="SolidArrayPropertyType"> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:_Solid"  minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded" /> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 
A container for an array of solids. The elements are always contained in the array property, referencing 
geometry elements or arrays of geometry elements is not supported. 


 <element name="solidArrayProperty" type="gml:SolidArrayPropertyType" /> 
 
This property element contains a list of solid elements. solidArrayProperty is the predefined property which 
can be used by GML Application Schemas whenever a GML Feature has a property with a value that is 
substitutable for a list of _Solid. 


10.2.3.4 gml:SolidType, gml:Solid 


 <complexType name="SolidType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractSolidType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element name="exterior" type="gml:SurfacePropertyType" minOccurs="0" /> 
     <element name="interior" type="gml:SurfacePropertyType" minOccurs="0" 


maxOccurs="unbounded" /> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
 <element name="Solid" type="gml:SolidType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Solid" /> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


82  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 


A solid is the basis for 3-dimensional geometry. The extent of a solid is defined by the boundary surfaces 
(shells). A shell is represented by a composite surface, where every shell is used to represent a single 
connected component of the boundary of a solid. It consists of a composite surface (a list of orientable 
surfaces) connected in a topological cycle (an object whose boundary is empty). Unlike a Ring, a shell's 
elements have no natural sort order. Like Rings, shells are simple. 


The element exterior specifies the outer boundary of the solid. Boundaries of solids are similar to surface 
boundaries. In normal 3-dimensional Euclidean space, one (composite) surface is distinguished as the 
exterior. In the more general case, this is not always possible. 


The element interior specifies the inner boundary of the solid. Boundaries of solids are similar to surface 
boundaries. 


11 GML schemas  geometric complex, geometric composites and geometric 
aggregates 


11.1 Overview 


This clause describes the geometry model used by GML in the XML Schema documents: 


 geometryAggregates.xsd 


 geometryComplexes.xsd 


The GML types and elements are described in the schemas listed in Annex C. The geometry schemas are 
identified by the following location-independent name (using URN syntax): 


urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-xsd:geometryAggregates:v3.1.0 
urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-xsd:geometryComplexes:v3.1.0 


 
All types, elements and attributes in these XML Schema documents are covered by this Clause.  


Geometric aggregates (i.e. instances of a subtype of AbstractGeometricAggregateType) are arbitrary 
aggregations of geometry elements. They are not assumed to have any additional internal structure and are 
used to "collect" pieces of geometry of a specified type. Application schemas may use aggregates for features 
that use multiple geometric objects in their representations. 


Geometric complexes (i.e. instances of GeometricComplexType) are closed collections of geometric 
primitives, i.e. they will contain their boundaries. The composite geometries (CompositeCurve, 
CompositeSurface and CompositeSolid) can be viewed as primitives and as complexes. See Clause 7.6 and 
ISO 19107 for more details on the nature of composite geometries. 


11.2 Geometric complex and geometric composites  


A geometric complex is a set of primitive geometric objects (in a common coordinate system) whose interiors 
are disjoint. Further, if a primitive is in a geometric complex, then there exists a set of primitives in that 
complex whose point-wise union is the boundary of this first primitive. 


A GeometricComplex in GML is a collection of geometrically disjoint, simple primitives. If a geometric primitive 
(other than a Point) is in a particular GeometricComplex, then there exists a set of primitives of lower 
dimension in the same complex that form the boundary of this primitive. 


A geometric composite (GML specifies CompositeCurve, CompositeSurface or CompositeSolid) represents a 
geometric complex with an underlying core geometry that is isomorphic to a primitive. Thus, a composite 
curve is a collection of curves whose geometry could be viewed as a curve (albeit one with a complex inner 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 83 
 


 


structure). Composites are intended for use as attribute values in datasets in which the underlying geometry 
has been decomposed, usually to expose its topological nature. 


The members of a geometric composite shall represent a homogeneous collection of geometric primitives 
whose union would be the core geometry of the composite. The complex would include all member primitives 
and all primitives on the boundary of these primitives, and so forth until Points are included. Thus the 
member properties in CompositeCurve, CompositeSurface and CompositeSolid represent a subset of the 
element property of GeometricComplex. 


Geometric complexes and composites shall be used in application schemas where the sharing of geometry is 
important. 


For more information about geometric complexes and an extensive discussion about 
complexes/composites/primitives and their commonalities/differences see ISO 19107. 


As XML Schema does not support the concept of multiple inheritance which is used in ISO 19107 to express 
the duality of the geometric composites (as an open primitive and as a closed complex) in the GML geometry 
model, the composites inherit from AbstractGeometricPrimitiveType only. However, by using a <choice> 
element, a composite can be used in any property, which expects a GeometricComplex as its value. 


11.2.1 Composite Geometries  


11.2.1.1 gml:CompositeCurveType, gml:CompositeCurve 


 <complexType name="CompositeCurveType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCurveType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:curveMember" maxOccurs="unbounded" /> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
 <element name="CompositeCurve" type="gml:CompositeCurveType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Curve" /> 
 
A CompositeCurve is defined by a sequence of (orientable) curves such that the each curve in the sequence 
terminates at the start point of the subsequent curve in the list. 


The element curveMember references or contains one curve in the composite curve.  


The curves are contiguous, the collection of curves is ordered. 


NOTE This definition allows for a nested structure, i.e. a CompositeCurve may use, for example, another 
CompositeCurve as a curve member. 


11.2.1.2 gml:CompositeSurfaceType, gml:CompositeSurface 


 <complexType name="CompositeSurfaceType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractSurfaceType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:surfaceMember" maxOccurs="unbounded" /> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
 <element name="CompositeSurface" type="gml:CompositeSurfaceType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Surface" /> 
 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


84  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


A CompositeSurface is defined by a set of orientable surfaces. A composite surface is geometry type with all 
the geometric properties of a (primitive) surface. Essentially, a composite surface is a collection of surfaces 
that join in pairs on common boundary curves and which, when considered as a whole, form a single surface.  


The element surfaceMember references or contains one surface in the composite surface. The surfaces are 
contiguous. 


NOTE This definition allows for a nested structure, i.e. a CompositeSurface may use, for example, another 
CompositeSurface as a member. 


11.2.1.3 gml:CompositeSolidType, gml:CompositeSolid 


 <complexType name="CompositeSolidType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractSolidType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:solidMember" maxOccurs="unbounded" /> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
 <element name="CompositeSolid" type="gml:CompositeSolidType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Solid" /> 
 
A composite solid is a geometry type with all the geometric properties of a (primitive) solid.  


Essentially, a composite solid is a collection of solids that join in pairs on common boundary surfaces and 
which, when considered as a whole, form a single solid.  


The element generator references or contains one solid in the composite solid. The solids are contiguous. 


NOTE This definition allows for a nested structure, i.e. a CompositeSolid may use, for example, another 
CompositeSolid as a member. 


11.2.2 Geometric Complex 


11.2.2.1 gml:GeometricComplexType, gml:GeometricComplex 


 <complexType name="GeometricComplexType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGeometryType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element name="element" type="gml:GeometricPrimitivePropertyType" 


maxOccurs="unbounded" /> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
 <element name="GeometricComplex" type="gml:GeometricComplexType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Geometry" /> 
 
A geometric complex. Every element element references or contains one geometric primitive (this includes 
composite geometries).  


11.2.2.2 gml:GeometricComplexPropertyType 


 <complexType name="GeometricComplexPropertyType"> 
  <choice minOccurs="0"> 
   <element ref="gml:GeometricComplex" /> 
   <element ref="gml:CompositeCurve" /> 
   <element ref="gml:CompositeSurface" /> 
   <element ref="gml:CompositeSolid" /> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 85 
 


 


  </choice> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup" /> 
 </complexType> 
 
A property that has a geometric complex as its value domain can either be an appropriate geometry element 
encapsulated in an element of this type or an XLink reference to a remote geometry element (where remote 
includes geometry elements located elsewhere in the same document). Either the reference or the contained 
element shall be given, but neither both nor none. 


NOTE The allowed geometry elements contained in such a property (or referenced by it) have to be modeled by an 
XML Schema choice element since the composites (conceptually) inherit both from geometric complex and geometric 
primitive and are already part of the _GeometricPrimitive substitution group. 


11.3 Geometric Aggregates 


11.3.1 Aggregates of unspecified dimensionality 


11.3.1.1 gml:AbstractGeometricAggregateType, gml:_GeometricAggregate 


 <complexType name="AbstractGeometricAggregateType" abstract="true"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGeometryType" /> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
This is the abstract root type of the geometric aggregates. 


 <element name="_GeometricAggregate" type="gml:AbstractGeometricAggregateType" abstract="true" 
 substitutionGroup="gml:_Geometry" /> 
 
The "_GeometricAggregate" element is the abstract head of the substitution group for all geometric 
aggremates. 


11.3.1.2 gml:MultiGeometryType, gml:MultiGeometry, gml:geometryMember, gml:geometryMembers 


 <complexType name="MultiGeometryType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGeometricAggregateType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:geometryMember" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded" /> 
     <element ref="gml:geometryMembers" minOccurs="0" /> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
 <element name="MultiGeometry" type="gml:MultiGeometryType" substitutionGroup="gml:_GeometricAggregate" /> 
 
A geometry collection shall include one or more geometries, referenced through geometryMember elements. 


The members of the geometric aggregate can be specified either using the "standard" property or the array 
property style. It is also valid to use both the "standard" and the array property style in the same collection. 


NOTE Array properties cannot reference remote geometry elements via XLinks. 


 <element name="geometryMember" type="gml:GeometryPropertyType" /> 
 
This property element either references a geometry element via the XLink-attributes or contains the geometry 
element. 


 <element name="geometryMembers" type="gml:GeometryArrayPropertyType" /> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


86  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 
This property element contains a list of geometry elements. The order of the elements is significant and shall 
be preserved when processing the array. 


11.3.1.3 gml:MultiGeometryPropertyType, gml:multiGeometryProperty 


 <complexType name="MultiGeometryPropertyType"> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:_GeometricAggregate"  minOccurs="0"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup" /> 
 </complexType> 
 
A property that has a geometric aggregate as its value domain can either be an appropriate geometry element 
encapsulated in an element of this type or an XLink reference to a remote geometry element (where remote 
includes geometry elements located elsewhere in the same document). Either the reference or the contained 
element shall be given, but neither both nor none. 


 <element name="multiGeometryProperty" type="gml:MultiGeometryPropertyType" /> 
 
This property element either references a geometric aggregate via the XLink-attributes or contains the "multi 
geometry" element. multiGeometryProperty is the predefined property, which can be used by GML Application 
Schemas whenever a GML Feature has a property with a value that is substitutable for _GeometricAggregate. 


11.3.2 0-dimensional aggregates 


11.3.2.1 gml:MultiPointType, gml:MultiPoint, gml:pointMember, gml:pointMembers 


 <complexType name="MultiPointType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGeometricAggregateType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:pointMember" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded" /> 
     <element ref="gml:pointMembers" minOccurs="0" /> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
 <element name="MultiPoint" type="gml:MultiPointType" substitutionGroup="gml:_GeometricAggregate" /> 
 
A MultiPoint is defined by one or more Points, referenced through pointMember elements. 


The members of the geometric aggregate can be specified either using the "standard" property or the array 
property style. It is also valid to use both the "standard" and the array property style in the same collection. 


NOTE Array properties cannot reference remote geometry elements via XLinks. 


 <element name="pointMember" type="gml:PointPropertyType" /> 
 
This property element either references a Point via the XLink-attributes or contains the Point element. 


 <element name="pointMembers" type="gml:PointArrayPropertyType" /> 
 
This property element contains a list of points. The order of the elements is significant and shall be preserved 
when processing the array. 


11.3.2.2 gml:MultiPointPropertyType, gml:multiPointProperty 


 <complexType name="MultiPointPropertyType"> 
  <sequence> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 87 
 


 


   <element ref="gml:MultiPoint"  minOccurs="0"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup" /> 
 </complexType> 
 
A property that has a collection of points as its value domain can either be an appropriate geometry element 
encapsulated in an element of this type or an XLink reference to a remote geometry element (where remote 
includes geometry elements located elsewhere in the same document). Either the reference or the contained 
element shall be given, but neither both nor none. 


 <element name="multiPointProperty" type="gml:MultiPointPropertyType" /> 
 
This property element either references a point aggregate via the XLink-attributes or contains the "multi point" 
element. multiPointProperty is the predefined property, which can be used by GML Application Schemas 
whenever a GML Feature has a property with a value that is substitutable for MultiPoint. 


11.3.3 1-dimensional aggregates 


11.3.3.1 gml:MultiCurveType, gml:multiCurve, gml:curveMembers 


 <complexType name="MultiCurveType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGeometricAggregateType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:curveMember" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded" /> 
     <element ref="gml:curveMembers" minOccurs="0" /> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
 <element name="MultiCurve" type="gml:MultiCurveType" substitutionGroup="gml:_GeometricAggregate" /> 
 
A MultiCurve is defined by one or more Curves, referenced through curveMember elements. 


The members of the geometric aggregate can be specified either using the "standard" property or the array 
property style. It is also valid to use both the "standard" and the array property style in the same collection. 


NOTE Array properties cannot reference remote geometry elements via XLinks. 


 <element name="curveMembers" type="gml:CurveArrayPropertyType" /> 
 
This property element contains a list of curves. The order of the elements is significant and shall be preserved 
when processing the array. 


11.3.3.2 gml:MultiCurvePropertyType, gml:multiCurveProperty 


 <complexType name="MultiCurvePropertyType"> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:MultiCurve" minOccurs="0" /> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup" /> 
 </complexType> 
 
A property that has a collection of curves as its value domain can either be an appropriate geometry element 
encapsulated in an element of this type or an XLink reference to a remote geometry element (where remote 
includes geometry elements located elsewhere in the same document). Either the reference or the contained 
element shall be given, but neither both nor none. 


 <element name="multiCurveProperty" type="gml:MultiCurvePropertyType" /> 
 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


88  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


This property element either references a curve aggregate via the XLink-attributes or contains the "multi 
curve" element. multiCurveProperty is the predefined property, which can be used by GML Application 
Schemas whenever a GML Feature has a property with a value that is substitutable for MultiCurve. 


11.3.3.3 gml:lineStringMember 


 <element name="lineStringMember" type="gml:LineStringPropertyType" /> 
 
Deprecated with GML 3.0 and included only for backwards compatibility with GML 2. Use "curveMember" 
instead. 


This property element either references a line string via the XLink-attributes or contains the line string 
element. 


11.3.3.4 gml:MultiLineStringType, gml:MultiLineString 


 <complexType name="MultiLineStringType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGeometricAggregateType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:lineStringMember" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded" /> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
A MultiLineString is defined by one or more LineStrings, referenced through lineStringMember elements. 
Deprecated with GML version 3.0. Use MultiCurveType instead. 


 <element name="MultiLineString" type="gml:MultiLineStringType" substitutionGroup="gml:_GeometricAggregate" /> 
 
Deprecated with GML 3.0 and included for backwards compatibility with GML 2. Use the "MultiCurve" element 
instead. 


11.3.3.5 gml:MultiLineStringPropertyType 


 <complexType name="MultiLineStringPropertyType"> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:MultiLineString" minOccurs="0" /> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup" /> 
 </complexType> 
 
This type is deprecated with GML 3.0 and shall not be used. It is included for backwards compatibility with 
GML 2. Use MultiCurvePropertyType instead. 


A property that has a collection of line strings as its value domain can either be an appropriate geometry 
element encapsulated in an element of this type or an XLink reference to a remote geometry element (where 
remote includes geometry elements located elsewhere in the same document). Either the reference or the 
contained element shall be given, but neither both nor none. 


11.3.4 2-dimensional aggregates 


11.3.4.1 gml:MultiSurfaceType, gml:MultiSurface, gml :surfaceMember, gml :surfaceMembers 


 <complexType name="MultiSurfaceType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGeometricAggregateType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:surfaceMember" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded" /> 
     <element ref="gml:surfaceMembers" minOccurs="0" /> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 89 
 


 


    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
 <element name="MultiSurface" type="gml:MultiSurfaceType" substitutionGroup="gml:_GeometricAggregate" /> 
 
A MultiSurface is defined by one or more Surfaces, referenced through surfaceMember elements.  


The members of the geometric aggregate can be specified either using the "standard" property or the array 
property style. It is also valid to use both the "standard" and the array property style in the same collection. 


NOTE Array properties cannot reference remote geometry elements via XLinks. 


 <element name="surfaceMember" type="gml:SurfacePropertyType" /> 
 
This property element either references a surface via the XLink-attributes or contains the surface element. A 
surface element is any element, which is substitutable for "_Surface". 


 <element name="surfaceMembers" type="gml:SurfaceArrayPropertyType" /> 
 
This property element contains a list of surfaces. The order of the elements is significant and shall be 
preserved when processing the array. 


11.3.4.2 gml:MultiSurfacePropertyType, gml:multiSurfaceProperty 


 <complexType name="MultiSurfacePropertyType"> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:MultiSurface"  minOccurs="0" /> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup" /> 
 </complexType> 
 
A property that has a collection of surfaces as its value domain can either be an appropriate geometry 
element encapsulated in an element of this type or an XLink reference to a remote geometry element (where 
remote includes geometry elements located elsewhere in the same document). Either the reference or the 
contained element shall be given, but neither both nor none. 


 <element name="multiSurfaceProperty" type="gml:MultiSurfacePropertyType" /> 
 
This property element either references a surface aggregate via the XLink-attributes or contains the "multi 
surface" element. multiSurfaceProperty is the predefined property, which can be used by GML Application 
Schemas whenever a GML Feature has a property with a value that is substitutable for MultiSurface. 


11.3.4.3 gml:MultiPolygonType, gml:MultiPolygon, gml:polygonMember 


 <complexType name="MultiPolygonType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGeometricAggregateType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:polygonMember" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded" /> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
A MultiPolygon is defined by one or more Polygons, referenced through polygonMember elements. 
Deprecated with GML version 3.0. Use MultiSurfaceType instead. 


 <element name="MultiPolygon" type="gml:MultiPolygonType" substitutionGroup="gml:_GeometricAggregate" /> 
 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


90  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


Deprecated with GML 3.0 and included for backwards compatibility with GML 2. Use the "MultiSurface" 
element instead. 


 <element name="polygonMember" type="gml:PolygonPropertyType" /> 
 
Deprecated with GML 3.0 and included only for backwards compatibility with GML 2.0. Use "surfaceMember" 
instead. 


This property element either references a polygon via the XLink-attributes or contains the polygon element. 


11.3.4.4 gml:MultiPolygonPropertyType 


 <complexType name="MultiPolygonPropertyType"> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:MultiPolygon"  minOccurs="0"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup" /> 
 </complexType> 
 
This type is deprecated with GML 3.0 and shall not be used. It is included for backwards compatibility with 
GML 2. Use MultiSurfacePropertyType instead. 


A property that has a collection of polygons as its value domain can either be an appropriate geometry 
element encapsulated in an element of this type or an XLink reference to a remote geometry element (where 
remote includes geometry elements located elsewhere in the same document). Either the reference or the 
contained element shall be given, but neither both nor none. 


11.3.5 3-dimensional aggregates 


11.3.5.1 gml:MultiSolidType, gml:MultiSolid, gml:solidMember, gml:solidMembers 


 <complexType name="MultiSolidType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGeometricAggregateType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:solidMember" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded" /> 
     <element ref="gml:solidMembers" minOccurs="0" /> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
 <element name="MultiSolid" type="gml:MultiSolidType" substitutionGroup="gml:_GeometricAggregate" /> 
 
A MultiSolid is defined by one or more Solids, referenced through solidMember elements.  


The members of the geometric aggregate can be specified either using the "standard" property or the array 
property style. It is also valid to use both the "standard" and the array property style in the same collection. 


NOTE Array properties cannot reference remote geometry elements via XLinks. 


 <element name="solidMember" type="gml:SolidPropertyType" /> 
 
This property element either references a solid via the XLink-attributes or contains the solid element. A solid 
element is any element, which is substitutable for "_Solid". 


 <element name="solidMembers" type="gml:SolidArrayPropertyType" /> 
 
This property element contains a list of solids. The order of the elements is significant and shall be preserved 
when processing the array. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 91 
 


 


11.3.5.2 gml:MultiSolidPropertyType, gml:multiSolidProperty 


 <complexType name="MultiSolidPropertyType"> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:MultiSolid"  minOccurs="0" /> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup" /> 
 </complexType> 


A property that has a collection of solids as its value domain can either be an appropriate geometry element 
encapsulated in an element of this type or an XLink reference to a remote geometry element (where remote 
includes geometry elements located elsewhere in the same document). Either the reference or the contained 
element shall be given, but neither both nor none. 


 <element name="multiSolidProperty" type="gml:MultiSolidPropertyType" /> 
 
This property element either references a solid aggregate via the XLink-attributes or contains the "multi solid" 
element. multiSolidProperty is the predefined property, which can be used by GML Application Schemas 
whenever a GML Feature has a property with a value that is substitutable for MultiSolid. 


12 GML schemas  Coordinate reference systems schemas 


12.1 Overview 


12.1.1 Introduction 


This clause describes the six GML schema documents for encoding the definitions of coordinate reference 
systems and coordinate operations, explaining their contents, structure, and dependencies. Those six schema 
documents are: 


a) referenceSystems.xsd 


b) coordinateReferenceSystems.xsd 


c) datums.xsd 


d) coordinateSystems.xsd 


e) coordinateOperations.xsd 


f) dataQuality.xsd 


All these schema documents are closely based on the UML package with a similar name in OGC Abstract 
Specification Topic 2, which is based on ISO 19111. All these schema documents are listed in Annex C. All 
these schema documents describe components in the http://www.opengis.net/gml namespace, for which 
the prefix gml is normally used. 


12.1.2 Coordinates 


The position of a point can be described by (a set of) coordinates. Coordinates are unambiguous only when 
the associated coordinate reference system has been fully defined. 


The geometry of spatial features might alternately be expressed in terms of invariant geometric quantities, viz. 
shapes and relative positions/orientations (strictly speaking only distance ratios and angles are invariant 
quantities). However, this would be unworkable: performing calculations on spatial data would become a 
major effort. The expression of the position of a point by coordinates introduces simplicity in terms of overview 
and calculus. 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


92  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


However, there is a price to be paid for this convenience. To describe a simple shape such as a triangle in a 
plane, six (plane) coordinates are required, whereas only a single distance ratio and an angle would suffice. 
The inherent degrees of freedom (four in 2D, seven in 3D) have to be satisfied by choosing the origin of the 
coordinate axes, their unit of measure, and the orientations of the axes. This choice underlines the fact that 
coordinates are human-defined quantities and not natural phenomena. Although this may seem self-evident, it 
is often overlooked and has consequences for the interpretation of coordinates and their error characteristics. 


The choice of values for the parameters that constitute the degrees of freedom of the coordinate space is 
captured in the concept of a coordinate reference system. Without the full specification of the coordinate 
reference system, coordinates are ambiguous at best and meaningless at worst. The fact that such a choice 
must be made, either arbitrarily or by adopting values from survey measurements, leads to the large number 
of coordinate reference systems in use around the world. It also causes the little understood fact that the 
latitude and longitude of a point are not unique. 


In this document, the term coordinates means the tuple of ordered scalar values that define the position of a 
single point in a coordinate reference system. The order of the values in the tuple and their unit(s) of measure 
are parts of the coordinate reference system definition. The tuple is composed of one, two, or three 
ordinates. The ordinates must be mutually independent and their number must be equal to the dimension of 
the coordinate space; for example, a tuple of coordinates may not contain two heights. In this document, the 
term set of coordinates is used to indicate the coordinates of multiple points. 


However, it must be pointed out that usage in practice of the term coordinates is subject to ambiguity. 
Sometimes the term coordinate is used to indicate the tuple; the plural coordinates in that case describes 
the coordinates of multiple points. Others use the term set of coordinates to describe the coordinates of a 
single point. In that case the term coordinate is sometimes used instead of ordinate. The reader is advised 
to carefully infer the intended meaning from the context. 


The concept of coordinates may be expanded from a strictly spatial context to include time. Time is then 
added as another ordinate to the coordinate tuple. It is even possible to add two time-coordinates, provided 
the two coordinates describe different independent quantities. An example of the latter is the time/space 
position of a subsurface point feature of which the vertical ordinate is expressed as the two-way travel time of 
a sound signal in milliseconds, as is common in seismic imaging and a second time ordinate indicates the 
time of observation, usually expressed in whole years. 


In summary: each tuple of coordinates describing the position of a point shall be assopciated with a coordinate 
reference system. Instead of supplying the definition of the coordinate reference system with every single 
point, coordinates are often supplied in data sets in which all coordinates belong to the same coordinate 
reference system. Each data set then uses one coordinate reference system definition or reference, which 
applies to all coordinates in that data set. 


12.1.3 Some geodetic concepts 


Geodesy is the applied science that aims to determine the size and shape of the earth. In a more practical and 
local sense, this may be understood to mean the determination of the relative positions of points on or near 
the earths surface. Survey measurements and techniques are the means used to achieve this aim. 


The most accurate reference shape approximating the earth is the geoid, the surface that is defined as the 
locus of all points with equal gravity at mean sea level. This shape excludes topography and the effects of 
tides, currents and weather on the oceans and seas. Topographic heights are typically expressed relative to 
the geoid. The gravity vector at mean sea level is everywhere perpendicular to this surface. Due to the 
irregular mass distribution in the earths interior, the geoid has an irregular shape. This makes the geoid 
unsuitable to use in calculations on spatial data; unfortunate because the familiar concept of height derives 
from the geoid and the geoid therefore implicitly plays an important role in all engineering and mapping 
activities. The direction of gravity also plays an important role in the mentioned survey techniques. 


The geoid is approximated by the nearest regular body, an oblate spheroid, of which the oblateness 
corresponds to the flattening of the physical earth (and thus the geoid) at the poles due to the earth's rotation. 
In survey practice, this spheroid is often referred to as an ellipsoid. Although mathematically the term 
spheroid is a more precise description than ellipsoid, the latter term is used in preference of spheroid, in 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 93 
 


 


accordance with ISO 19111. The ellipsoid is a reasonably accurate approximation of the geoid, the latter 
undulating around the ellipsoids surface with variations only in the order of several tens of metres. 


The advantage of the ellipsoid is that it is much easier to work with mathematically than the geoid. The 
ellipsoid forms the basis of the best-known type of coordinate reference systems: the Geographic CRS. The 
position of a point relative to the ellipsoid is expressed by means of geographic coordinates: geodetic latitude 
() and geodetic longitude (). The height (h) above the ellipsoid is of not much practical use because 
everyday heights are related to the geoid (gravity-related heights, indicated by H). Ellipsoidal height is an 
inseparable element of a 3D coordinate tuple, and originates either directly from a 3D survey technique (e.g. 
GPS) or from the transformation of horizontal coordinates extended with a gravity-related height. 


Unfortunately there is not just one ellipsoid. An ellipsoid is a matter of choice, and therefore many choices are 
possible. The size and shape of the ellipsoid are traditionally chosen such that the surface of the geoid is 
matched as closely as possible locally, e.g. in a country, although a number global of best-fits are available. 
Each association of an ellipsoid with earth surface geometry results in the implicit choice of parameters to 
satisfy the degrees of freedom problem described in Subclause 12.1.2 above. In this case, the choice results 
in the definition of the origin, orientation, size, and shape of the ellipsoid. Collectively this choice is captured 
by the concept of geodetic datum. 


A Geographic CRS is not suitable for mapmaking on a planar surface, because it describes positions on a 
curved surface. It is impossible to represent such geometry in a Euclidean plane without introducing 
distortions. The need to control these distortions has given rise to the development of the science of map 
projections. Although some map projections can be represented as a geometric process, in general a map 
projection is a set of formulae that converts geodetic latitude and longitude to plane (map) coordinates. Height 
plays no role in this process, which is entirely two-dimensional. 


Heights are traditionally determined separate from horizontal position in separate height networks, which is 
due to the different survey techniques used for the determination of horizontal and vertical geometry. Most 
practical heights are defined in close relationship with the gravity vector. Geodetic science distinguishes 
several different types of gravity-related heights. The differences between those are considered irrelevant for 
the purposes of this specification. 


12.1.4 Non-geodetic coordinate reference systems 


12.1.4.1 Introduction 


In addition to the geographic and related coordinate reference systems discussed above, several other types 
of CRSs are when needed, and are handled by the GML schemas discussed. These other types of CRSs 
include: 


12.1.4.2 Geocentric CRS 


Type of coordinate reference system that deals with the earths curvature by taking the 3D spatial view, which 
obviates the need to model the earths curvature. The origin of a geocentric CRS is at the approximate centre 
of mass of the earth. 


12.1.4.3 Temporal CRS 


Used for the recording of time in association with any of the listed spatial coordinate reference systems. 


12.1.4.4 Engineering CRS 


Type of coordinate reference system that is used in a contextually local sense. This sub-type is used to model 
two broad categories of local coordinate reference systems: 
 
a) earth-fixed systems, applied to activities on or near the surface of the earth; 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


94  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


b) spatial referencing by coordinates on moving platforms such as road vehicles, vessels, aircraft or 
spacecraft. 


Earth-fixed Engineering CRSs are commonly based on a simple flat-earth approximation of the earths 
surface, and the effect of earth curvature on feature geometry is ignored: calculations on coordinates use 
simple plane arithmetic without any corrections for earth curvature. The application of such Engineering CRSs 
to relatively small areas and "contextually local" is in this case equivalent to "spatially local". 


One specialized type of earth-fixed Engineering CRS is a linear CRS, which represents position along a 
specified (usually not straight) line. 


Engineering CRSs used on moving platforms are usually intermediate coordinate reference systems that are 
computationally required to calculate geodetic coordinates. These coordinate reference systems are subject to 
all the motions of the platform with which they are associated. In this case "contextually local" means that the 
associated coordinates are meaningful only relative to the moving platform. Earth curvature is usually 
irrelevant and is therefore ignored. In the spatial sense their applicability may extend from the immediate 
vicinity of the platform (e.g. a moving seismic ship) to the entire earth (e.g. in space applications). The 
determining factor is the mathematical model deployed in the positioning calculations. Transformation of 
coordinates from these moving Engineering CRSs to earth-referenced coordinate reference systems involves 
time-dependent coordinate operation parameters, which can be modelled by the structures provided in this 
UML model. 


12.1.4.5 Image CRS 


An Image CRS is an Engineering CRS applied to images. Image CRSs warrant treatment as a separate sub-
type because a separate user community exists for images with its own vocabulary. The definition of the 
associated Image Datum contains two data quantities not relevant for other datums and coordinate reference 
systems. 


12.1.4.6 Derived CRS 


Some coordinate reference systems are defined by applying a coordinate conversion to another coordinate 
reference system. Such a coordinate reference system is called a Derived CRS, and the coordinate reference 
system it was derived from by applying the conversion is called the Source CRS. A coordinate conversion is 
an arithmetic operation with zero or more parameters that have defined values. The best-known example of a 
Derived CRS is a Projected CRS, which is always derived from a source Geographic CRS by applying the 
coordinate conversion known as a map projection. 


An example of a Derived CRS of derivedCRStype: geographic is one of which the unit of measure has been 
modified with respect to an earlier defined Geographic CRS, which then takes the role of Source CRS. 
Another example is the CRS for a set of gridded data, where row and column coordinates reflect the position 
in the grid. 


12.1.5 Important XML elements 


These XML Schemas encode definition data for both Coordinate Reference Systems (CRSs) and Coordinate 
Operations (including coordinate Transformations and Conversions). This definition data includes identification 
and specification data, both included as needed. The definition data for a CRS includes or references 
definition data for a Coordinate System and a Datum, as appropriate. When applicable, definition data for a 
CRS includes or references definition data for a Coordinate Operation, and vice-versa. 


The specified XML encoding includes multiple alternative top level XML elements that can be used where 
needed. (That is, there is not a single top level element that may be the basis for all XML documents.) Most of 
these top level XML elements are GML objects that include identification information, allowing it to be 
referenced. The alternative top level XML elements include: 


a) All concrete XML elements in the substitution group headed by the abstract CoordinateReferenceSystem 
XML element. These elements can each be used to transfer the definition of one coordinate reference 
system of that type. These nine concrete XML elements are named: 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 95 
 


 


1) CompoundCRS 


2) GeocentricCRS 


3) GeographicCRS 


4) ProjectedCRS 


5) EngineeringCRS 


6) ImageCRS 


7) VerticalCRS 


8) TemporalCRS 


9) DerivedCRS 


b) All concrete XML elements that are substitutable for the abstract CoordinateOperation XML element, 
namely: 


1) ConcatenatedOperation. This element should be used to encode the definition of a concatenated 
coordinate conversion, which combines a specified sequence of Transformations and/or 
Conversions. 


2) PassThroughOperation. This element should be used to encode the definition of a pass through 
coordinate conversion, which uses a specified Conversion or Transformation to convert a subset of 
the coordinates of a CompoundCRS. 


3) Transformation. This element may be used to encode the definition of an approximate coordinate 
transformation, from one specified source coordinate reference system to another specified target 
coordinate reference system. 


4) Conversion. This element may be used to encode the definition of an exact coordinate conversion, 
from one coordinate reference system to another coordinate reference system. 


NOTE 1 The Conversion and Transformation elements should not be used for well-known coordinate operation 
methods with many instances. 


The concrete XML elements that are substitutable for CoordinateReferenceSystem use multiple lower level 
XML elements containing data structures. These lower level elements include all five concrete elements that 
are substitutable for the abstract Datum XML element, named: 


a) GeodeticDatum 


b) VerticalDatum 


c) TemporalDatum 


d) EngineeringDatum 


e) ImageDatum 


These lower level XML elements also include all ten concrete elements that are substitutable for the abstract 
CoordinateSystem XML element, named: 


a) EllipsoidalCS 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


96  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


b) VerticalCS 


c) CartesianCS 


d) ObliqueCartesianCS 


e) LinearCS 


f) PolarCS 


g) SphericalCS 


h) CylindricalCS 


i) TemporalCS 


j) UserDefinedCS 


The concrete XML elements that are substitutable for the CoordinateOperation element use multiple lower 
level elements containing data structures, including the elements named: 


a) CovarianceMatrix 


b) CovarianceElement 


c) OperationMethod 


d) OperationParameter 


e) OperationParameterGroup 


f) ParameterValue 


g) ParameterValueGroup 


NOTE 2 The ParameterValue and ParameterValueGroup elements should not be used for well-known coordinate 
operation methods with many instances. 


12.2 referenceSystems schema 


12.2.1 Overview 


The reference systems schema, referenceSystems.xsd, has three logical parts, which define elements and 
types for XML encoding of the definitions of: 


a) Object identification, of the ten types of GML objects used for coordinate reference systems and 
coordinate operations 


b) Validity, of three types of GML objects 


c) High-level part of the definitions of coordinate reference systems 


This schema encodes the Reference System package of the UML Model for OGC Abstract Specification Topic 
2: Spatial Referencing by Coordinates. That UML model is adapted from ISO 19111 - Spatial referencing by 
coordinates, as described in Annex B of Topic 2. The SC_CRS class is also encoded here, to eliminate the 
(circular) references from coordinateOperations.xsd to coordinateReferenceSystems.xsd. The 
RS_SpatialReferenceSystemUsingGeographicIdentifier class is not encoded, since it is not applicable to 
coordinate positions. The CI_Citation class is not directly encoded, since such information can be included as 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 97 
 


 


metaDataProperty elements which are optionally allowed. A modified version of the EX_Extent (DataType) 
class from ISO 19115 is currently encoded here, using GML 3 schema types. 


The referenceSystems schema includes the dictionary.xsd, geometryBasic2d.xsd, and temporal.xsd GML 
schemas. This schema is identified by the following location-independent name (using URN syntax): 


urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-xsd:referenceSystems:v3.1.0 
 


12.2.2 Identification 


12.2.2.1 gml:IdentifierType 


 <complexType name="IdentifierType"> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:name"/> 
   <element ref="gml:version" minOccurs="0"/> 
   <element ref="gml:remarks" minOccurs="0"> 
   </element> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 
An identification of a CRS object. The first use of the IdentifierType for an object, if any, is normally the 
primary identification code, and any others are aliases. 


The IdentifierType uses gml:name for the Identifier code or name, often from a controlled list or pattern 
defined by a code space. The optional codeSpace attribute is normally included to identify or reference a code 
space within which one or more codes are defined. This code space is often defined by some authority 
organization, where one organization may define multiple code spaces. The range and format of each Code 
Space identifier is defined by that code space authority. Information about that code space authority can be 
included as metaDataProperty elements which are optionally allowed in all CRS objects. 


12.2.2.2 gml:version 


 <element name="version" type="string"/> 
 
Identifier of the version of the associated codeSpace or code, as specified by the codeSpace or code 
authority. This version is included only when the "code" or "codeSpace" uses versions. When appropriate, the 
version is identified by the effective date, coded using ISO 8601 date format. 


12.2.2.3 gml:remarks 


 <element name="remarks" type="gml:StringOrRefType" substitutionGroup="gml:description"/> 
 
Information about this code or alias. Contains text or refers to external text. 


12.2.2.4 gml:SimpleNameType 


 <complexType name="SimpleNameType"> 
  <simpleContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:CodeType"> 
    <attribute name="codeSpace" type="anyURI" use="prohibited"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </simpleContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
The primary name of an object. The string in the CodeType contains the object identification name, and the 
codeSpace attribute is not included. 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


98  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


12.2.2.5 gml:scope 


 <element name="scope" type="string"/> 
 
Description of the domain of usage, or limitations of usage, for which this CRS object is valid. 


12.2.3 Validity 


12.2.3.1 gml:validArea 


 <element name="validArea" type="gml:ExtentType"/> 
 
Area or region in which this CRS object is valid 


12.2.3.2 gml:ExtentType 


 <complexType name="ExtentType"> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:description" minOccurs="0"/> 
   <choice> 
    <element ref="gml:boundingBox" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
    <element ref="gml:boundingPolygon" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
   </choice> 
   <element ref="gml:verticalExtent" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
   <element ref="gml:temporalExtent" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 
Information about the spatial, vertical, and/or temporal extent of a reference system object. Constraints: At 
least one of the elements "description", "boundingBox", "boundingPolygon", "verticalExtent", and 
temporalExtent" shall be included, but more that one can be included when appropriate. Furthermore, more 
than one "boundingBox", "boundingPolygon", "verticalExtent", and/or temporalExtent" element can be 
included, with more than one meaning the union of the individual domains. 


The "description" element contains a description of spatial and/or temporal extent of this object. The 
boundingBox and boundingPolygon are alternative elements for defining the Geographic domain of this 
reference system object. If the srsName value for the boundingBox element references a CRS that includes 
elevation and time, the verticalExtent and temporalExtent elements may not be needed. 


The boundingBox elements are an unordered list of bounding boxes (or envelopes) whose union describes 
the spatial domain of this object. The boundingPolygon elements are an unordered list of bounding polygons 
whose union describes the spatial domain of this object. The verticalExtent elements are an unordered list of 
vertical intervals whose union describes the spatial domain of this object.  The temporalExtent elements are 
an unordered list of time periods whose union describes the spatial domain of this object. 


12.2.3.3 gml:boundingBox 


 <element name="boundingBox" type="gml:EnvelopeType"/> 
 
A bounding box (or envelope) defining the spatial domain of this object. 


12.2.3.4 gml:boundingPolygon 


 <element name="boundingPolygon" type="gml:PolygonType"/> 
A bounding polygon horizontal defining the horizontal spatial domain of this object. 


12.2.3.5 gml:verticalExtent 


 <element name="verticalExtent" type="gml:EnvelopeType"/> 
 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 99 
 


 


An interval defining the vertical spatial domain of this object. 


12.2.3.6 gml:temporalExtent 


 <element name="temporalExtent" type="gml:TimePeriodType"/> 
 
A time period defining the temporal domain of this object. 


12.2.4 High-level coordinate reference system 


12.2.4.1 gml:_ReferenceSystem 


 <element name="_ReferenceSystem" type="gml:AbstractReferenceSystemType" abstract="true" 
 substitutionGroup="gml:Definition"/> 


  
<complexType name="AbstractReferenceSystemBaseType" abstract="true"> 


  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:DefinitionType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:metaDataProperty" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:remarks" minOccurs="0> 
     <element ref="gml:srsName"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute ref="gml:id" use="required"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
  


<complexType name="AbstractReferenceSystemType" abstract="true"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractReferenceSystemBaseType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:srsID" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:validArea" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:scope" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Description of a spatial and/or temporal reference system used by a dataset. 


The AbstractReferenceSystemBaseType provides basic encoding for reference system objects, simplifying 
and restricting the DefinitionType as needed. 


The "remarks" element contains comments on or information about this reference system, including source 
information. 


The "srsID" elements contain a set of alternative identifications of this reference system. The first srsID, if any, 
is normally the primary identification code, and any others are aliases. 


12.2.4.2 gml:srsName 


 <element name="srsName" type="gml:SimpleNameType" substitutionGroup="gml:name"/> 
 
The name by which this reference system is identified. 


12.2.4.3 gml:srsID 


 <element name="srsID" type="gml:IdentifierType"/> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


100  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 
An identification of a reference system. 


12.2.4.4 gml:referenceSystemRef 


 <element name="referenceSystemRef" type="gml:ReferenceSystemRefType" 
 substitutionGroup="gml:dictionaryEntry"/> 


  
<complexType name="ReferenceSystemRefType"> 


  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:DictionaryEntryType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:_ReferenceSystem" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Association to a reference system, either referencing or containing the definition of that reference system. 


12.2.4.5 gml:_CRS 


 <element name="_CRS" type="gml:AbstractCRSType" abstract="true" substitutionGroup="gml:_ReferenceSystem"/> 
 
 <complexType name="AbstractCRSType" abstract="true"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractReferenceSystemType"/> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Abstract coordinate reference system, usually defined by a coordinate system and a datum. This abstract 
complexType shall not be used, extended, or restricted, in an Application Schema, to define a concrete 
subtype with a meaning equivalent to a concrete subtype specified in this document. 


12.2.4.6 gml:crsRef 


 <element name="crsRef" type="gml:CRSRefType" substitutionGroup="gml:referenceSystemRef"/> 
 
 <complexType name="CRSRefType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:ReferenceSystemRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:_CRS" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Association to a CRS abstract coordinate reference system, either referencing or containing the definition of 
that CRS. 


12.3 coordinateReferenceSystems schema 


12.3.1 Overview 


12.3.1.1 Introduction 


A coordinate reference system consists of a coordinate system that is (usually) related to the earth through 
one datum. A coordinate reference system may be single, compound, or derived. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 101 
 


 


The coordinate system is composed of a set of coordinate axes with specified units of measure. This concept 
implies the mathematical rules that define how coordinate values are calculated from distances, angles and 
other geometric elements and vice versa. 


The datum defines the origin of the coordinate system and ties it to the earth, ensuring that the abstract 
mathematical concept coordinate system can be applied to the practical problem of describing positions of 
features on or near the earths surface by means of coordinates. The datum implicitly (occasionally explicitly) 
contains the values chosen for the set parameters that represent the degrees of freedom of the coordinate 
system, as described in Subclause 12.1.2 above. Each datum subtype can be associated with only specific 
types of coordinate systems. 


12.3.1.2 Principal types of coordinate reference systems 


Geodetic survey practice usually divides coordinate reference systems into a number of sub-types. The 
common classification criterion for sub-typing of coordinate reference systems can be described as the way in 
which they deal with earth curvature. This has a direct effect on the portion of the earths surface that can be 
covered by that type of CRS with an acceptable degree of error.   


Thus the following principal sub-types of coordinate reference system are distinguished: 


a) Geocentric. Type of coordinate reference system that deals with the earths curvature by taking the 3D 
spatial view, which obviates the need to model the earths curvature. The origin of a geocentric CRS is at 
the approximate centre of mass of the earth. 


b) Geographic. Type of coordinate reference system based on an ellipsoidal approximation of the geoid. 
This provides an accurate representation of the geometry of geographic features for a large portion of the 
earths surface. Geographic coordinate reference systems can be 2D or 3D. A 2D Geographic CRS is 
used when positions of features are described on the surface of the reference ellipsoid; a 3D Geographic 
CRS is used when positions are described on, above or below the reference ellipsoid.  


c) Projected. Type of coordinate reference system that is based on an approximation of the shape of the 
earths surface by a plane. The distortion that is inherent in the approximation is carefully controlled and 
known. Distortion correction is commonly applied to calculated bearings and distances to produce values 
that are a close match to actual field values. 


d) Engineering. Type of coordinate reference system that is that is used only in a contextually local sense. 
This sub-type is used to model two broad categories of local coordinate reference systems: 


 earth-fixed systems, applied to engineering activities on or near the surface of the earth; 


 spatial referencing by coordinates on moving platforms such as road vehicles, vessels, aircraft or 
spacecraft. 


More information on Engineering CRSs is provided in Subclause 12.1.4. 


e) Image. An Image CRS is an Engineering CRS applied to images. Image CRSs warrant treatmentare 
treated as a separate sub-type because a separate user community exists for images with its own 
vocabulary. The definition of the associated Image Datum contains two data attributes not relevant for 
other datums and coordinate reference systems. 


f) Vertical. Type of coordinate reference system used for the recording of heights or depths. Vertical CRSs 
make use of the direction of gravity to define the concept of height or depth, but its relationship with 
gravity may not be straightforward. By implication ellipsoidal heights (h) cannot be captured in a vertical 
coordinate reference system. Ellipsoidal heights cannot exist independently, but only as inseparable part 
of a 3D coordinate tuple defined in a geographic 3D coordinate reference system. 


g) Temporal. Used for the recording of time in association with any of the listed spatial coordinate reference 
systems only.    







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


102  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


EDITORS NOTE  The CRS WG of the OGC has agreed to expand the types of CRS described above to also allow 
defining Earth Cantered Inertial CRSs, which do not rotate with the Earth. However, the changes needed to do this have 
not yet been determined. 


 
12.3.1.3 Compound coordinate reference systems 


The traditional separation of horizontal and vertical position has resulted in different coordinate reference 
systems that are horizontal (2D) in nature and vertical (1D). Established practice combines the horizontal 
coordinates of a point with a height or depth from a different coordinate reference system to construct valid 
coordinates in 3D space. The coordinate reference system to which these 3D coordinates are referenced 
combines the separate horizontal and vertical coordinate reference systems of the horizontal and vertical 
coordinates. Such a coordinate system is called a compound coordinate reference system. 


A Compound CRS is thus a coordinate reference system that combines an ordered sequence of two or more 
coordinate reference systems, none of which can themselves be compound. In general, a Compound CRS 
may contain any number of axes. The Compound CRS contains an ordered set of coordinate reference 
systems and the tuple order of a compound coordinate set shall follow that order, while the subsets of the 
tuple, described by each of the composing coordinate reference systems, shall follow the tuple order valid for 
their respective coordinate reference systems. 


For spatial coordinates, a number of constraints exist for the construction of compound CRSs. For example, 
the coordinate reference systems that are combined should not contain any duplicate or redundant axes. Valid 
combinations include: 


a) Geographic 2D + Vertical 


b) Geographic 2D + Engineering 1D (near vertical) 


c) Projected + Vertical 


d) Projected + Engineering 1D (near vertical) 


e) Engineering (horizontal 2D or 1D linear) + Vertical 


Any coordinate reference system or any of the above listed combinations of coordinate reference systems can 
have a temporal coordinate reference system added. More than one temporal coordinate reference system 
may be added if these axes represent different time quantities. For example, the oil industry sometimes uses 
4D seismic, by which is meant seismic data with the vertical axis expressed in milliseconds (signal travel 
time). A second time axis indicates how it changes with time (years), e.g. as a reservoir is gradually exhausted 
of its recoverable oil or gas). 


12.3.1.4 Derived coordinate reference systems 


Some coordinate reference systems are defined by applying a coordinate conversion to another coordinate 
reference system.  Such a coordinate reference system is called a Derived CRS, and the coordinate reference 
system it was derived from by applying the conversion is called the Source or Base CRS. A coordinate 
conversion is an arithmetic operation with zero or more parameters that have defined values. The Source 
CRS and Derived CRS have the same Datum. The best-known example of a Derived CRS is a Projected 
CRS, which is always derived from a source Geographic CRS by applying the coordinate conversion known 
as a map projection. 


In principle, all sub-types of coordinate reference system may take on the role of either Source or Derived 
CRS with the exception of a Geocentric CRS and a Projected CRS. The latter is modelled as an object class 
under its own name, rather than as a general Derived CRS of type projected. This has been done to honour 
common practice, which acknowledges Projected CRSsCRSs as one of the best known types of coordinate 
reference systems. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 103 
 


 


An example of a Derived CRS of derivedCRStype: geographic is one of which the unit of measure has been 
modified with respect to an earlier defined Geographic CRS, which then takes the role of Source CRS. 


12.3.1.5 Schema introduction 


The spatial-temporal coordinate reference systems schema, coordinateReferenceSystems.xsd, has two 
logical parts. One part defines elements and types for XML encoding of abstract coordinate reference systems 
definitions. The larger part defines specialized constructs for XML encoding of definitions of the multiple 
concrete types of spatial-temporal coordinate reference systems. 


This schema encodes the Coordinate Reference System package of the UML Model for OGC Abstract 
Specification Topic 2: Spatial Referencing by Coordinates, with the exception of the abstract "SC_CRS" class. 
That UML model is adapted from ISO 19111 - Spatial referencing by coordinates, as described in Annex B of 
Topic 2. 


The coordinateReferenceSystems schema includes the coordinateSystems.xsd, datums.xsd, and 
coordinateOperations.xsd GML schemas. This schema is identified by the following location-independent 
name (using URN syntax): 


urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-xsd: coordinateReferenceSystems:v3.1.0 
 


12.3.2 Abstract coordinate reference systems 


12.3.2.1 gml:_CoordinateReferenceSystem 


 <element name="_CoordinateReferenceSystem" type="gml:AbstractCoordinateReferenceSystemType" 
 abstract="true" substitutionGroup="gml:_CRS"/> 


 
 <complexType name="AbstractCoordinateReferenceSystemType" abstract="true"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCRSType"/> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
A coordinate reference system consists of an ordered sequence of coordinate system axes that are related to 
the earth through a datum. A coordinate reference system is defined by one datum and by one coordinate 
system. Most coordinate reference system do not move relative to the earth, except for engineering 
coordinate reference systems defined on moving platforms such as cars, ships, aircraft, and spacecraft. For 
further information, see Subclause 12.3.1. 


Coordinate reference systems are commonly divided into sub-types. The common classification criterion for 
sub-typing of coordinate reference systems is the way in which they deal with earth curvature. This has a 
direct effect on the portion of the earth's surface that can be covered by that type of CRS with an acceptable 
degree of error. The exception to the rule is the subtype "Temporal" which has been added by analogy. 


12.3.2.2 gml:coordinateReferenceSystemRef 


 <element name="coordinateReferenceSystemRef" type="gml:CoordinateReferenceSystemRefType" 
 substitutionGroup="gml:crsRef"/> 


 
 <complexType name="CoordinateReferenceSystemRefType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:CRSRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:_CoordinateReferenceSystem" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


104  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 
Association to a coordinate reference system, either referencing or containing the definition of that reference 
system. 


12.3.2.3 gml:_GeneralDerivedCRS 


 <element name="_GeneralDerivedCRS" type="gml:AbstractGeneralDerivedCRSType" abstract="true"  
substitutionGroup="gml:_CoordinateReferenceSystem"/> 


 
 <complexType name="AbstractGeneralDerivedCRSType" abstract="true"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCoordinateReferenceSystemType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:baseCRS"/> 
     <element ref="gml:definedByConversion"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
A coordinate reference system that is defined by its coordinate conversion from another coordinate reference 
system (not by a datum). This abstract complexType shall not be used, extended, or restricted, in an 
Application Schema, to define a concrete subtype with a meaning equivalent to a concrete subtype specified 
in this document. 


12.3.2.4 gml:baseCRS 


 <element name="baseCRS" type="gml:CoordinateReferenceSystemRefType"/> 
 
Association to the coordinate reference system used by this derived CRS. 


12.3.2.5 gml:definedByConversion 


 <element name="definedByConversion" type="gml:GeneralConversionRefType"/> 
 
Association to the coordinate conversion used to define this derived CRS. 


12.3.2.6 gml:generalDerivedCRSRef 


 <element name="generalDerivedCRSRef" type="gml:GeneralDerivedCRSRefType"  
substitutionGroup="gml:coordinateReferenceSystemRef"/> 


 
 <complexType name="GeneralDerivedCRSRefType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:CoordinateReferenceSystemRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:_GeneralDerivedCRS" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Association to a general derived coordinate reference system, either referencing or containing the definition of 
that reference system. 


12.3.3 Concrete coordinate reference systems 


12.3.3.1 gml:CompoundCRS 


 <element name="CompoundCRS" type="gml:CompoundCRSType" substitutionGroup="gml:_CRS"/> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 105 
 


 


 
 <complexType name="CompoundCRSType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCRSType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:includesCRS" minOccurs="2" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
A coordinate reference system describing the position of points through two or more independent coordinate 
reference systems. 


The includesCRS elements are an ordered sequence of associations to all the component coordinate 
reference systems included in this compound coordinate reference system. 


12.3.3.2 gml:includesCRS 


 <element name="includesCRS" type="gml:CoordinateReferenceSystemRefType"/> 
 
An association to a component coordinate reference system included in this compound coordinate reference 
system. 


12.3.3.3 gml:compoundCRSRef 


 <element name="compoundCRSRef" type="gml:CompoundCRSRefType" substitutionGroup="gml:crsRef"/> 
 
 <complexType name="CompoundCRSRefType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:CRSRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:CompoundCRS" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Association to a compound coordinate reference system, either referencing or containing the definition of that 
reference system. 


12.3.3.4 gml:GeographicCRS 


 <element name="GeographicCRS" type="gml:GeographicCRSType" 
 substitutionGroup="gml:_CoordinateReferenceSystem"/> 


  
<complexType name="GeographicCRSType"> 


  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCoordinateReferenceSystemType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:usesEllipsoidalCS"/> 
     <element ref="gml:usesGeodeticDatum"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
A coordinate reference system based on an ellipsoidal approximation of the geoid; this provides an accurate 
representation of the geometry of geographic features for a large portion of the earth's surface. 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


106  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


12.3.3.5 gml:usesEllipsoidalCS 


 <element name="usesEllipsoidalCS" type="gml:EllipsoidalCSRefType"/> 
 
Association to the ellipsoidal coordinate system used by this CRS. 


12.3.3.6 gml:usesGeodeticDatum 


 <element name="usesGeodeticDatum" type="gml:GeodeticDatumRefType"/> 
 
Association to the geodetic datum used by this CRS 


12.3.3.7 gml:geographicCRSRef 


 <element name="geographicCRSRef" type="gml:GeographicCRSRefType" 
 substitutionGroup="gml:coordinateReferenceSystemRef"/> 
 


 <complexType name="GeographicCRSRefType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:CoordinateReferenceSystemRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:GeographicCRS" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Association to a geographic coordinate reference system, either referencing or containing the definition of that 
reference system. 


12.3.3.8 gml:VerticalCRS 


 <element name="VerticalCRS" type="gml:VerticalCRSType"  
substitutionGroup="gml:_CoordinateReferenceSystem"/> 
 


 <complexType name="VerticalCRSType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCoordinateReferenceSystemType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:usesVerticalCS"/> 
     <element ref="gml:usesVerticalDatum"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
A 1D coordinate reference system used for recording heights or depths. Vertical CRSs make use of the 
direction of gravity to define the concept of height or depth, but the relationship with gravity may not be 
straightforward. By implication, ellipsoidal heights (h) cannot be captured in a vertical coordinate reference 
system. Ellipsoidal heights cannot exist independently, but only as an inseparable part of a 3D coordinate 
tuple defined in a geographic 3D coordinate reference system. 


12.3.3.9 gml:usesVerticalCS 


 <element name="usesVerticalCS" type="gml:VerticalCSRefType"/> 
 
Association to the vertical coordinate system used by this CRS. 


12.3.3.10 gml:usesVerticalDatum 


 <element name="usesVerticalDatum" type="gml:VerticalDatumRefType"/> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 107 
 


 


 
Association to the vertical datum used by this CRS. 


12.3.3.11 gml:verticalCRSRef 


 <element name="verticalCRSRef" type="gml:VerticalCRSRefType" 
 substitutionGroup="gml:coordinateReferenceSystemRef"/> 
 


 <complexType name="VerticalCRSRefType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:CoordinateReferenceSystemRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:VerticalCRS" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Association to a vertical coordinate reference system, either referencing or containing the definition of that 
reference system. 


12.3.3.12 gml:GeocentricCRS 


 <element name="GeocentricCRS" type="gml:GeocentricCRSType" 
 substitutionGroup="gml:_CoordinateReferenceSystem"/> 
 


 <complexType name="GeocentricCRSType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCoordinateReferenceSystemType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <choice> 
      <element ref="gml:usesCartesianCS"/> 
      <element ref="gml:usesSphericalCS"/> 
     </choice> 
     <element ref="gml:usesGeodeticDatum"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
A 3D coordinate reference system with the origin at the approximate centre of mass of the earth. A geocentric 
CRS deals with the earth's curvature by taking a 3D spatial view, which obviates the need to model the earth's 
curvature. 


12.3.3.13 gml:usesCartesianCS 


 <element name="usesCartesianCS" type="gml:CartesianCSRefType"/> 
 
Association to the Cartesian coordinate system used by this CRS. 


12.3.3.14 gml:usesSphericalCS 


 <element name="usesSphericalCS" type="gml:SphericalCSRefType"/> 
 
Association to the spherical coordinate system used by this CRS. 


12.3.3.15 gml:geocentricCRSRef 


 <element name="geocentricCRSRef" type="gml:GeocentricCRSRefType" 
 substitutionGroup="gml:coordinateReferenceSystemRef"/> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


108  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 
 <complexType name="GeocentricCRSRefType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:CoordinateReferenceSystemRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:GeocentricCRS" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Association to a geocentric coordinate reference system, either referencing or containing the definition of that 
reference system. 


12.3.3.16 gml:ProjectedCRS 


 <element name="ProjectedCRS" type="gml:ProjectedCRSType" substitutionGroup="gml:_GeneralDerivedCRS"/> 
 
 <complexType name="ProjectedCRSType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGeneralDerivedCRSType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:usesCartesianCS"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
A 2D coordinate reference system used to approximate the shape of the earth on a planar surface, but in such 
a way that the distortion that is inherent to the approximation is carefully controlled and known. Distortion 
correction is commonly applied to calculated bearings and distances to produce values that are a close match 
to actual field values. 


12.3.3.17 gml:projectedCRSRef 


 <element name="projectedCRSRef" type="gml:ProjectedCRSRefType" 
 substitutionGroup="gml:generalDerivedCRSRef"/> 
 


 <complexType name="ProjectedCRSRefType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:GeneralDerivedCRSRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:ProjectedCRS" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Association to a projected coordinate reference system, either referencing or containing the definition of that 
reference system. 


12.3.3.18 gml:DerivedCRS 


 <element name="DerivedCRS" type="gml:DerivedCRSType" substitutionGroup="gml:_GeneralDerivedCRS"/> 
 
 <complexType name="DerivedCRSType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGeneralDerivedCRSType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:derivedCRSType"/> 
     <element ref="gml:usesCS"/> 
    </sequence> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 109 
 


 


   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
A coordinate reference system that is defined by its coordinate conversion from another coordinate reference 
system but is not a projected coordinate reference system. This category includes coordinate reference 
systems derived from a projected coordinate reference system. 


12.3.3.19 gml:derivedCRSType 


 <element name="derivedCRSType" type="gml:DerivedCRSTypeType"/> 
 
 <complexType name="DerivedCRSTypeType"> 
  <simpleContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:CodeType"> 
    <attribute name="codeSpace" type="anyURI" use="required"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </simpleContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Type of a derived coordinate reference system. The required codeSpace attribute shall reference a source of 
information specifying the values and meanings of all the allowed string values for this DerivedCRSTypeType. 


12.3.3.20 gml:usesCS 


 <element name="usesCS" type="gml:CoordinateSystemRefType"/> 
 
Association to the coordinate system used by this CRS. 


12.3.3.21 gml:derivedCRSRef 


 <element name="derivedCRSRef" type="gml:DerivedCRSRefType" 
 substitutionGroup="gml:generalDerivedCRSRef"/> 
 


 <complexType name="DerivedCRSRefType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:GeneralDerivedCRSRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:DerivedCRS" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Association to a non-projected derived coordinate reference system, either referencing or containing the 
definition of that reference system. 


12.3.3.22 gml:EngineeringCRS 


 <element name="EngineeringCRS" type="gml:EngineeringCRSType" 
 substitutionGroup="gml:_CoordinateReferenceSystem"/> 
 


 <complexType name="EngineeringCRSType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCoordinateReferenceSystemType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:usesCS"/> 
     <element ref="gml:usesEngineeringDatum"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


110  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 </complexType> 
 
A contextually local coordinate reference system; which can be divided into two broad categories: 


a) earth-fixed systems applied to engineering activities on or near the surface of the earth; 


b) CRSs on moving platforms such as road vehicles, vessels, aircraft, or spacecraft. 


For further information, see Subclause 12.1.4. 


12.3.3.23 gml:usesEngineeringDatum 


 <element name="usesEngineeringDatum" type="gml:EngineeringDatumRefType"/> 
 
Association to the engineering datum used by this CRS. 


12.3.3.24 gml:engineeringCRSRef 


 <element name="engineeringCRSRef" type="gml:EngineeringCRSRefType" 
 substitutionGroup="gml:coordinateReferenceSystemRef"/> 
 


 <complexType name="EngineeringCRSRefType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:CoordinateReferenceSystemRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:EngineeringCRS" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Association to an engineering coordinate reference system, either referencing or containing the definition of 
that reference system. 


12.3.3.25 gml:ImageCRS 


 <element name=" " type="gml:ImageCRSType" substitutionGroup="gml:_CoordinateReferenceSystem"/> 
 
 <complexType name="ImageCRSType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCoordinateReferenceSystemType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <choice> 
      <element ref="gml:usesCartesianCS"/> 
      <element ref="gml:usesObliqueCartesianCS"/> 
     </choice> 
     <element ref="gml:usesImageDatum"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
An engineering coordinate reference system applied to locations in images. Image coordinate reference 
systems are treated as a separate sub-type because a separate user community exists for images with its 
own terms of reference. 


12.3.3.26 gml:usesObliqueCartesianCS 


 <element name="usesObliqueCartesianCS" type="gml:ObliqueCartesianCSRefType"/> 
 
Association to the oblique Cartesian coordinate system used by this CRS. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 111 
 


 


12.3.3.27 gml:usesImageDatum 


 <element name="usesImageDatum" type="gml:ImageDatumRefType"/> 
 
Association to the image datum used by this CRS. 


12.3.3.28 gml:imageCRSRef 


 <element name=" " type="gml:ImageCRSRefType" substitutionGroup="gml:coordinateReferenceSystemRef"/> 
 
 <complexType name="ImageCRSRefType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:CoordinateReferenceSystemRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:ImageCRS" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Association to an image coordinate reference system, either referencing or containing the definition of that 
reference system. 


12.3.3.29 gml:TemporalCRS 


 <element name="TemporalCRS" type="gml:TemporalCRSType" 
 substitutionGroup="gml:_CoordinateReferenceSystem"/> 
 


 <complexType name="TemporalCRSType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCoordinateReferenceSystemType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:usesTemporalCS"/> 
     <element ref="gml:usesTemporalDatum"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
A 1D coordinate reference system used for the recording of time. 


12.3.3.30 gml:usesTemporalCS 


 <element name="usesTemporalCS" type="gml:TemporalCSRefType"/> 
 
Association to the temporal coordinate system used by this CRS. 


12.3.3.31 gml:usesTemporalDatum 


 <element name="usesTemporalDatum" type="gml:TemporalDatumRefType"/> 
 
Association to the temporal datum used by this CRS. 


12.3.3.32 gml:temporalCRSRef 


 <element name="temporalCRSRef" type="gml:TemporalCRSRefType" 
 substitutionGroup="gml:coordinateReferenceSystemRef"/> 
 


 <complexType name="TemporalCRSRefType"> 
  <complexContent> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


112  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


   <restriction base="gml:CoordinateReferenceSystemRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:TemporalCRS" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Association to a temporal coordinate reference system, either referencing or containing the definition of that 
reference system. 


12.4 coordinateSystems schema 


12.4.1 Overview 


12.4.1.1 Introduction 


The coordinates of points are recorded in a coordinate system. A coordinate system is the set of coordinate 
system axes that spans the coordinate space. This concept implies the set of mathematical rules that 
determine how coordinates are associated with invariant quantities such as angles and distances. In other 
words, a coordinate system implies how coordinates are calculated from geometric elements such as 
distances and angles and vice versa. The calculus required to derive angles and distances from point 
coordinates and vice versa in a map plane is simple Euclidean 2D arithmetic. To do the same on the surface 
of an ellipsoid (curved 2D space) involves more complex ellipsoidal calculus. These rules cannot be specified 
in detail, but are implied in the geometric the properties of the coordinate space. 


NOTE: The word distances is used loosely in the above description. Strictly speaking distances are not invariant 
quantities, as they are expressed in the unit of measure defined for the coordinate system; ratios of distances are 
invariant. 


One coordinate system may be used by multiple coordinate reference systems. A coordinate system is 
composed of an ordered sequence of axes, the number of axes being equal to the dimension of the space of 
which it describes the geometry. Coordinates in coordinate tuples shall be listed in the specified axes 
sequence and units. 


The dimension of the coordinate space, the names, the units of measure, the directions and sequence of the 
axes are all part of the Coordinate System definition. The number of coordinates in a tuple and the number of 
axes in a coordinate system shall be equal.  


Example: It is therefore not permitted to supply a coordinate tuple with two heights of different definition in the same 
coordinate tuple. 


12.4.1.2 Coordinate system types 


Coordinate systems are divided in types by the geometric properties of the coordinate space spanned and the 
geometric properties of the axes themselves (straight or curved; perpendicular or not). Certain types of 
coordinate system can only be used with specific subtypes of coordinate reference system. A description of 
coordinate system types is provided in Table TBD. 


Table 3  Types of coordinate systems with CRS constraints 


CS type Description Used by CRS type 


Cartesian 1-, 2-, or 3-dimensional coordinate system that gives the position of points relative 
to 2 or 3 orthogonal straight axes in the 2- or 3-dimensional case. In the 1-
dimensional case, it contains a single straight coordinate axis. In the multi-
dimensional case all axes shall have the same unit of measure. 


Geocentric 
Projected 
Engineering 
Image 
Derived 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 113 
 


 


oblique 
Cartesian 


2- or 3-dimensional coordinate system with straight axes that are not necessarily 
orthogonal 


Engineering 
Image 
Derived 


ellipsoidal 2- or 3-dimensional coordinate system in which position is specified by geodetic 
latitude, geodetic longitude and (in the three-dimensional case) ellipsoidal height, 
associated with one or more geographic coordinate reference systems. 


Geographic 
Engineering  
Derived 


vertical 1-dimensional coordinate system used to record the heights (or depths) of points 
dependent on the Earths gravity field. An exact definition is deliberately not 
provided as the complexities of the subject fall outside the scope of this 
specification. 


Vertical 
Engineering 
Derived 


linear 1-dimensional coordinate system that consists of the points which lie on the single 
axis described. The associated ordinate is the distance from the specified origin to 
the point along the axis. Example: usage of the line feature representing a road to 
describe points on or along that road. 


Engineering 
Derived 


user-
defined 


2- or 3-dimensional coordinate system that consists of any combination of 
coordinate axes not covered by any other coordinate system type. An example is a 
multilinear coordinate system which contains one coordinate axis that may have 
any 1-D shape which has no intersections with itself. This non-straight axis is 
supplemented by one or two straight axes to complete a 2 or 3 dimensional 
coordinate system. 


Engineering  
Derived 


temporal 1-dimensional coordinate system containing a single time axis and used to 
describe the temporal position of a point in the specified time units from a specified 
time origin. 


Temporal 


spherical 3-dimensional coordinate system with one distance, measured from the origin, and 
two angular coordinates; not to be confused with an ellipsoidal coordinate system 
based on an ellipsoid degenerated into a sphere 


Geocentric 
Engineering  
Derived 


cylindrical 3-dimensional coordinate system consisting of a polar coordinate system extended 
by a straight coordinate axis perpendicular to the plane spanned by the polar 
coordinate system. 


Engineering  
Derived 


polar 2-dimensional coordinate system in which position is specified by the distance from 
the origin and the angle between the line from origin to point and a reference 
direction. 


Engineering  
Derived 


 
12.4.1.3 Coordinate system axis 


A coordinate system is composed of an ordered set of coordinate system axes. Each of its axes is completely 
characterised by a unique combination of axis name, axis abbreviation, axis direction and axis unit of 
measure. 


The concept of coordinate axis requires some clarification. Consider an arbitrary x, y, z coordinate system. 
The x-axis may be defined as the locus of points with y = z = 0.  This is easily enough understood if the x, y, z 
coordinate system is a Cartesian system and the space it describes is Euclidean. It becomes a bit more 
difficult to understand in the case of a strongly curved space, such as the surface of an ellipsoid, its geometry 
described by an ellipsoidal coordinate system (2D or 3D). Applying the same definition by analogy to the 
curvilinear latitude and longitude coordinates, the latitude axis would be the equator and the longitude axis 
would be the prime meridian, which is not a satisfactory definition. 


Bearing in mind that the order of the coordinates in a coordinate tuple shall be the same as the defined order 
of the coordinate axes, the i-th coordinate axis of a coordinate system is defined as the locus of points for 
which all coordinates with sequence number not equal to i, have a constant value locally (whereby i = 1 ...n, 
and n is the dimension of the coordinate space). 


It will be evident that the addition of the word locally in this definition apparently adds an element of ambiguity 
and this is intentional. However, the definition of the coordinate parameter associated with any axis shall be 
unique. The coordinate axis itself should not be interpreted as a unique mathematical object, the associated 
coordinate parameter should.   







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


114  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


Example 1 Geodetic latitude is defined as the Angle from the equatorial plane to the perpendicular to the ellipsoid 
through a given point, northwards usually treated as positive.  However, when used in an ellipsoidal coordinate system, 
the geodetic latitude axis will be described as pointing north.  In two different points on the ellipsoid the direction north 
will be a spatially different direction, but the concept of latitude is the same. 


Furthermore the specified directions of the coordinate axes are often only approximate; two geographic 
coordinate reference systems will make use of the same ellipsoidal coordinate system. These coordinate 
systems are associated with the earth through two different geodetic datums, which may lead to the two 
systems being slightly rotated w.r.t. each other.  


Usage of coordinate system axis names is constrained by geodetic custom in a number of cases, depending 
mainly on the coordinate reference system type. These constraints are shown in Table TBD. These 
constraints work in two directions; for example the names geodetic latitude and geodetic longitude shall be 
used to designate the coordinate axis names associated with a geographic coordinate reference system. 
Conversely, these names shall not be used in any other context. Image and engineering coordinate reference 
systems may make use of names specific to the local context or custom and are therefore not included as 
constraints in this list. 


Table 4  Naming constraints for coordinate system axes 


CS CRS Permitted coordinate system axis names 


Cartesian Geocentric Geocentric X, Geocentric Y, Geocentric Z 
Spherical Geocentric Spherical Latitude, Spherical Longitude, Geocentric Radius 
Ellipsoidal Geographic Geodetic latitude, Geodetic longitude, Ellipsoidal height (if 3D) 


Vertical Vertical Gravity-related height 


Vertical Vertical Depth 


Cartesian Projected Easting, Northing 


Cartesian Projected Westing, Southing 
 
Example 2 The combination {Latitude, Lat, north, degree} would lead to one instance of the object class 'coordinate 
system axis'; the combination {Latitude, , north, degree} to another instance, the axis abbreviation being different. 


12.4.1.4 Schema introduction 


The coordinate systems schema, coordinateSystems.xsd, has three logical parts, which define elements and 
types for XML encoding of the definitions of: 


a) Coordinate system axes 


b) Abstract coordinate system 


c) Multiple concrete types of spatial-temporal coordinate systems 


This schema encodes the Coordinate System package of the UML Model for OGC Abstract Specification 
Topic 2: Spatial Referencing by Coordinates. That UML model is adapted from ISO 19111 - Spatial 
referencing by coordinates, as described in Annex B of Topic 2. 


The referenceSystems schema includes the referenceSystems.xsd GML schema. This schema is identified by 
the following location-independent name (using URN syntax): 


 urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-xsd: coordinateSystems:v3.1.0 
 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 115 
 


 


12.4.2 Coordinate system axes 


12.4.2.1 gml:CoordinateSystemAxis 


 <element name="CoordinateSystemAxis" type="gml:CoordinateSystemAxisType" 
 substitutionGroup="gml:Definition"/> 
 


 <complexType name="CoordinateSystemAxisType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:CoordinateSystemAxisBaseType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:axisID" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:axisAbbrev"/> 
     <element ref="gml:axisDirection"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute ref="gml:uom" use="required"/> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
 <complexType name="CoordinateSystemAxisBaseType" abstract="true"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:DefinitionType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:metaDataProperty" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:remarks" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:axisName"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute ref="gml:id" use="required"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Definition of a coordinate system axis. 


The CoordinateSystemAxisBaseType provides the basic encoding for coordinate system axis objects, 
simplifying and restricting the DefinitionType as needed. 


The axisID" elements contain a set of alternative identifications of this coordinate system axis. The first 
axisID, if any, is normally the primary identification code, and any others are aliases. 


The "remarks" element contains comments on or information about this reference system, including source 
information. 


12.4.2.2 gml:axisName 


 <element name="axisName" type="gml:SimpleNameType" substitutionGroup="gml:name"/> 
 
The name by which this coordinate system axis is identified. 


12.4.2.3 gml:axisID 


 <element name="axisID" type="gml:IdentifierType"/> 
 
An identification of a coordinate system axis. 


12.4.2.4 gml:axisAbbrev 


 <element name="axisAbbrev" type="gml:CodeType"/> 
 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


116  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


The abbreviation used for this coordinate system axis. This abbreviation can be used to identify the ordinates 
in a coordinate tuple. Examples are X and Y. The codeSpace attribute can reference a source of more 
information on a set of standardized abbreviations, or on this abbreviation. 


12.4.2.5 gml:axisDirection 


 <element name="axisDirection" type="gml:CodeType"/> 
 
Direction of this coordinate system axis (or in the case of Cartesian projected coordinates, the direction of this 
coordinate system axis at the origin). Examples: north or south, east or west, up or down. Within any set of 
coordinate system axes, only one of each pair of terms can be used. For earth-fixed CRSs, this direction is 
often approximate and intended to provide a human interpretable meaning to the axis. When a geodetic 
datum is used, the precise directions of the axes may therefore vary slightly from this approximate direction. 
Note that an EngineeringCRS can include specific descriptions of the directions of its coordinate system axes. 
For example, the path of a linear CRS axis can be referenced in another document, such as referencing a 
GML feature that references or includes a curve geometry. The codeSpace attribute can reference a source of 
more information on a set of standardized directions, or on this direction. 


12.4.2.6 gml:uom 


 <attribute name="uom" type="anyURI"/> 
 
Identifier of the unit of measure used for this coordinate system axis. The value of this coordinate in a 
coordinate tuple shall be recorded using this unit of measure, whenever those coordinates use a coordinate 
reference system that uses a coordinate system that uses this axis. 


12.4.2.7 gml:coordinateSystemAxisRef 


 <element name="coordinateSystemAxisRef" type="gml:CoordinateSystemAxisRefType" 
 substitutionGroup="gml:dictionaryEntry"/> 
 


 <complexType name="CoordinateSystemAxisRefType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:DictionaryEntryType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:CoordinateSystemAxis" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Association to a coordinate system axis, either referencing or containing the definition of that axis. 


12.4.3 Abstract coordinate system 


12.4.3.1 gml:_CoordinateSystem 


 <element name="_CoordinateSystem" type="gml:AbstractCoordinateSystemType" abstract="true" 
 substitutionGroup="gml:Definition"/> 
 


 <complexType name="AbstractCoordinateSystemType" abstract="true"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCoordinateSystemBaseType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:csID" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:usesAxis" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 117 
 


 


 
 <complexType name="AbstractCoordinateSystemBaseType" abstract="true"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:DefinitionType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:metaDataProperty" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:remarks" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:csName"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute ref="gml:id" use="required"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
A coordinate system (CS) is the set of coordinate system axes that spans a given coordinate space. A CS is 
derived from a set of (mathematical) rules for specifying how coordinates in a given space are to be assigned 
to points. This abstract complexType shall not be used, extended, or restricted, in an Application Schema, to 
define a concrete subtype with a meaning equivalent to a concrete subtype specified in this document. 


The AbstractCoordinateSystemBaseType provides the basic encoding for coordinate system objects, 
simplifying and restricting the DefinitionType as needed. 


The csID" elements contain a set of alternative identifications of this coordinate system. The first csID, if any, 
is normally the primary identification code, and any others are aliases. 


The usesAxis elements are an ordered sequence of associations to the coordinate system axes included in 
this coordinate system. The coordinate values in a coordinate tuple shall be recorded in the order in which the 
coordinate system axes associations are recorded, whenever those coordinates use a coordinate reference 
system that uses this coordinate system. 


The "remarks" element contains comments on or information about this reference system, including source 
information. 


12.4.3.2 gml:csName 


 <element name="csName" type="gml:SimpleNameType" substitutionGroup="gml:name"/> 
 
The name by which this coordinate system is identified. 


12.4.3.3 gml:csID 


 <element name="csID" type="gml:IdentifierType"/> 
 
An identification of a coordinate system. 


12.4.3.4 gml:usesAxis 


 <element name="usesAxis" type="gml:CoordinateSystemAxisRefType" substitutionGroup="gml:dictionaryEntry"/> 
 


12.4.3.5 Association to a coordinate system axis.gml:coordinateSystemRef 


 <element name="coordinateSystemRef" type="gml:CoordinateSystemRefType"/> 
 
 <complexType name="CoordinateSystemRefType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:DictionaryEntryType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:_CoordinateSystem" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


118  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Association to a coordinate system, either referencing or containing the definition of that coordinate system. 


12.4.4 Concrete coordinate systems 


12.4.4.1 gml:EllipsoidalCS 


 <element name="EllipsoidalCS" type="gml:EllipsoidalCSType" substitutionGroup="gml:_CoordinateSystem"/> 
 
 <complexType name="EllipsoidalCSType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCoordinateSystemType"/> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
A two- or three-dimensional coordinate system in which position is specified by geodetic latitude, geodetic 
longitude, and (in the three-dimensional case) ellipsoidal height. An EllipsoidalCS shall have two or three 
usesAxis associations. 


12.4.4.2 gml:ellipsoidalCSRef 


 <element name="ellipsoidalCSRef" type="gml:EllipsoidalCSRefType" 
 substitutionGroup="gml:coordinateSystemRef"/> 
 


 <complexType name="EllipsoidalCSRefType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:CoordinateSystemRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:EllipsoidalCS" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Association to an ellipsoidal coordinate system, either referencing or containing the definition of that 
coordinate system. 


12.4.4.3 gml:CartesianCS 


 <element name="CartesianCS" type="gml:CartesianCSType" substitutionGroup="gml:_CoordinateSystem"/> 
 
 <complexType name="CartesianCSType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCoordinateSystemType"/> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
A 1-, 2-, or 3-dimensional coordinate system. Gives the position of points relative to orthogonal straight axes 
in the 2- and 3-dimensional cases. In the 1-dimensional case, it contains a single straight coordinate axis. In 
the multi-dimensional case, all axes shall have the same length unit of measure. A CartesianCS shall have 
one, two, or three usesAxis associations. 


12.4.4.4 gml:cartesianCSRef 


 <element name="cartesianCSRef" type="gml:CartesianCSRefType" substitutionGroup="gml:coordinateSystemRef"/> 
 
 <complexType name="CartesianCSRefType"> 
  <complexContent> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 119 
 


 


   <restriction base="gml:CoordinateSystemRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:CartesianCS" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Association to a Cartesian coordinate system, either referencing or containing the definition of that coordinate 
system. 


12.4.4.5 gml:VerticalCS 


 <element name="VerticalCS" type="gml:VerticalCSType" substitutionGroup="gml:_CoordinateSystem"/> 
 
 <complexType name="VerticalCSType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCoordinateSystemType"/> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
A one-dimensional coordinate system used to record the heights (or depths) of points. Such a coordinate 
system is usually dependent on the Earth's gravity field, perhaps loosely as when atmospheric pressure is the 
basis for the vertical coordinate system axis. A VerticalCS shall have one usesAxis association. 


12.4.4.6 gml:verticalCSRef 


 <element name="verticalCSRef" type="gml:VerticalCSRefType" substitutionGroup="gml:coordinateSystemRef"/> 
 
 <complexType name="VerticalCSRefType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:CoordinateSystemRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:VerticalCS" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Association to a vertical coordinate system, either referencing or containing the definition of that coordinate 
system. 


12.4.4.7 gml:TemporalCS 


 <element name="TemporalCS" type="gml:TemporalCSType" substitutionGroup="gml:_CoordinateSystem"/> 
 
 <complexType name="TemporalCSType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCoordinateSystemType"/> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
A one-dimensional coordinate system containing a single time axis, used to describe the temporal position of 
a point in the specified time units from a specified time origin. A TemporalCS shall have one usesAxis 
association. 


12.4.4.8 gml:temporalCSRef 


 <element name="temporalCSRef" type="gml:TemporalCSRefType" substitutionGroup="gml:coordinateSystemRef"/> 
 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


120  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 <complexType name="TemporalCSRefType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:CoordinateSystemRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:TemporalCS" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Association to a temporal coordinate system, either referencing or containing the definition of that coordinate 
system. 


12.4.4.9 gml:LinearCS 


 <element name="LinearCS" type="gml:LinearCSType" substitutionGroup="gml:_CoordinateSystem"/> 
 
 <complexType name="LinearCSType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCoordinateSystemType"/> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
A one-dimensional coordinate system that consists of the points that lie on the single axis described. The 
associated ordinate is the distance from the specified origin to the point along the axis. Example: usage of the 
line feature representing a road to describe points on or along that road. A LinearCS shall have one usesAxis 
association. 


12.4.4.10 gml:linearCSRef 


 <element name="linearCSRef" type="gml:LinearCSRefType" substitutionGroup="gml:coordinateSystemRef"/> 
 
 <complexType name="LinearCSRefType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:CoordinateSystemRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:LinearCS" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Association to a linear coordinate system, either referencing or containing the definition of that coordinate 
system. 


12.4.4.11 gml:UserDefinedCS 


 <element name="UserDefinedCS" type="gml:UserDefinedCSType" substitutionGroup="gml:_CoordinateSystem"/> 
 
 <complexType name="UserDefinedCSType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCoordinateSystemType"/> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
A two- or three-dimensional coordinate system that consists of any combination of coordinate axes not 
covered by any other coordinate system type. An example is a multilinear coordinate system which contains 
one coordinate axis that may have any 1-D shape which has no intersections with itself. This non-straight axis 
is supplemented by one or two straight axes to complete a 2 or 3 dimensional coordinate system. The non-
straight axis is typically incrementally straight or curved. A UserDefinedCS shall have two or three usesAxis 
associations. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 121 
 


 


12.4.4.12 gml:userDefinedCSRef 


 <element name="userDefinedCSRef" type="gml:UserDefinedCSRefType" 
 substitutionGroup="gml:coordinateSystemRef"/> 
 


 <complexType name="UserDefinedCSRefType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:CoordinateSystemRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:UserDefinedCS" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Association to a user-defined coordinate system, either referencing or containing the definition of that 
coordinate system. 


12.4.4.13 gml:SphericalCS 


 <element name="SphericalCS" type="gml:SphericalCSType" substitutionGroup="gml:_CoordinateSystem"/> 
 
 <complexType name="SphericalCSType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCoordinateSystemType"/> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
A three-dimensional coordinate system with one distance measured from the origin and two angular 
coordinates. Not to be confused with an ellipsoidal coordinate system based on an ellipsoid "degenerated" 
into a sphere. A SphericalCS shall have three usesAxis associations. 


12.4.4.14 gml:sphericalCSRef 


 <element name="sphericalCSRef" type="gml:SphericalCSRefType" substitutionGroup="gml:coordinateSystemRef"/> 
 
 <complexType name="SphericalCSRefType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:CoordinateSystemRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:SphericalCS" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Association to a spherical coordinate system, either referencing or containing the definition of that coordinate 
system. 


12.4.4.15 gml:PolarCS 


 <element name="PolarCS" type="gml:PolarCSType" substitutionGroup="gml:_CoordinateSystem"/> 
 
 <complexType name="PolarCSType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCoordinateSystemType"/> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


122  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


A two-dimensional coordinate system in which position is specified by the distance from the origin and the 
angle between the line from the origin to a point and a reference direction. A PolarCS shall have two usesAxis 
associations. 


12.4.4.16 gml:polarCSRef 


 <element name="polarCSRef" type="gml:PolarCSRefType" substitutionGroup="gml:coordinateSystemRef"/> 
 
 <complexType name="PolarCSRefType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:CoordinateSystemRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:PolarCS" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Association to a polar coordinate system, either referencing or containing the definition of that coordinate 
system. 


12.4.4.17 gml:CylindricalCS 


 <element name="CylindricalCS" type="gml:CylindricalCSType" substitutionGroup="gml:_CoordinateSystem"/> 
 
 <complexType name="CylindricalCSType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCoordinateSystemType"/> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
A three-dimensional coordinate system consisting of a polar coordinate system extended by a straight 
coordinate axis perpendicular to the plane spanned by the polar coordinate system. A CylindricalCS shall 
have three usesAxis associations. 


12.4.4.18 gml:cylindricalCSRef 


 <element name="cylindricalCSRef" type="gml:CylindricalCSRefType" 
 substitutionGroup="gml:coordinateSystemRef"/> 
 


 <complexType name="CylindricalCSRefType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:CoordinateSystemRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:CylindricalCS" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Association to a cylindrical coordinate system, either referencing or containing the definition of that coordinate 
system. 


12.4.4.19 gml:ObliqueCartesianCS 


 <element name="ObliqueCartesianCS" type="gml:ObliqueCartesianCSType" 
 substitutionGroup="gml:_CoordinateSystem"/> 
 


 <complexType name="ObliqueCartesianCSType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCoordinateSystemType"/> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 123 
 


 


  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
A two- or three-dimensional coordinate system with straight axes that are not necessarily orthogonal. An 
ObliqueCartesianCS shall have two or three usesAxis associations. 


12.4.4.20 gml:obliqueCartesianCSRef 


 <element name="obliqueCartesianCSRef" type="gml:ObliqueCartesianCSRefType" 
 substitutionGroup="gml:coordinateSystemRef"/> 
 


 <complexType name="ObliqueCartesianCSRefType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:CoordinateSystemRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:ObliqueCartesianCS" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Association to an oblique-Cartesian coordinate system, either referencing or containing the definition of that 
coordinate system. 


12.5 datums schema 


12.5.1 Overview 


12.5.1.1 Introduction 


A datum specifies the relationship of a coordinate system to the earth, or to a moving platform in some 
Engineering CRSs, thus creating a coordinate reference system. A datum can be used as the basis for one-, 
two- or three-dimensional systems. Five types of datum are specified: geodetic, vertical, engineering, image, 
and temporal. 


12.5.1.2 Geodetic datum 


A geodetic datum is used by a geographic or geocentric CRS, and combines an ellipsoid with a prime 
meridian. The ellipsoid is used to approximate the shape of the earth, as discussed above in Subclause 12.1.3 
and below. A prime meridian defines the origin from which longitude values are specified. Most geodetic 
datums use Greenwich as their prime meridian. 


An ellipsoid is defined to approximate the surface of the geoid. The area for which the approximation is valid 
varies  traditionally regionally, but with the advent of satellite positioning often globally. One ellipsoid shall be 
specified with every geodetic datum, even if the ellipsoid is not used computationally. The latter may be the 
case when a Geocentric CRS is used, e.g.., in the calculation of satellite orbit and ground positions from 
satellite observations. Although use of a Geocentric CRS apparently obviates the need of an ellipsoid, the 
ellipsoid usually played a role in the determination of the associated geodetic datum. 


An ellipsoid is defined either by its semi-major axis and inverse flattening, or by its semi-major axis and semi-
minor axis. For some applications, for example small-scale mapping in atlases, a spherical approximation of 
the geoids surface is used, requiring only the radius of the sphere to be specified. In the XML Schema, these 
options are modelled by a mandatory element semiMajorAxis, plus a secondDefiningParameter element. 
That element allows specification of the semiMinorAxis or inverseFlattening as the second defining ellipsoid 
parameter, or can specify that a spherical model is used. For a sphere, the "semiMajorAxis" is interpreted as 
the radius of the sphere. 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


124  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


12.5.1.3 Vertical datum 


A vertical datum can only be associated with a vertical coordinate reference system. Further sub-typing is 
required to describe vertical datums adequately.  The following types of vertical datum are distinguished:  


a) Geoidal. The zero value of the associated (vertical) coordinate system axis is defined to approximate a 
constant potential surface, usually the geoid. Such a reference surface is usually determined by a national 
or scientific authority and is then a well-known, named datum. This is the default vertical datum type, 
because it is the most common one encountered. 


b) Depth. The zero point of the vertical axis is defined by a surface that has meaning for the purpose the 
associated vertical measurements are used for. For hydrographic charts, this is often a predicted nominal 
sea surface (i.e.., without waves or other wind and current effects) that occurs at low tide. Examples are 
Lowest Astronomical Tide and Lowest Low Water Spring. A different example is a sloping and undulating 
River Datum defined as the nominal river water surface occurring at a quantified river discharge. 


c) Barometric. A vertical datum is of type barometric if atmospheric pressure is the basis for the definition 
of the origin. Atmospheric pressure may be used as the intermediary to determine height (barometric 
height determination) or it may be used directly as the vertical ordinate, against which other parameters 
are measured. The latter case is applied routinely in meteorology. 


Barometric height determination is routinely used in aircraft. The altimeter (barometer) on board is set to 
the altitude of the airfield at the time of take-off, which corrects simultaneously for instantaneous air 
pressure and altitude of the airfield. The measured height value is commonly named altitude. 


In some land surveying applications, height differences between points are measured with barometers. To 
obtain absolute heights, the measured height differences are added to the known heights of control 
points. In that case the vertical datum type is not barometric, but is the same as that of the vertical control 
network used to obtain the heights of the new points and its vertical datum type. 


The accuracy of this technique is limited, as it is affected strongly by the spatial and temporal variability of 
atmospheric pressure. This accuracy limitation impacts the precision of the associated vertical datum 
definition. The datum is usually the surface of constant atmospheric pressure approximately equating to 
mean sea level (MSL). The origin or anchor point is usually a point of known MSL height. The instruments 
are calibrated at this point by correcting for the instantaneous atmospheric pressure at sea level and the 
height of the point above MSL. 


In meteorology, atmospheric pressure routinely takes the role of vertical ordinate in a CRS that is used as 
a spatial reference frame for meteorological parameters in the upper atmosphere. The origin of the datum 
is the (hypothetical) zero atmospheric pressure and the positive vertical axis points down (to increasing 
pressure). 


d) Other surface. In some cases, e.g. oil exploration and production, geological features, i.e.., the top or 
bottom of a geologically identifiable and meaningful subsurface layer, are sometimes used as a vertical 
datum. Other variations to the above three vertical datum types may exist and are all bracketed in this 
category. 


12.5.1.4 Image datum 


An image datum is used in a local context, to describe the origin of an image coordinate reference system. 
The image grid is defined as the set of lines of constant integer ordinate values. The term image grid is often 
used in other standards to describe the concept of Image CRS. However, care shall be taken to correctly 
interpret this term in the context in which it is used. The term grid cell is often used as a substitute for the 
term pixel. 


The grid lines of the image may be associated in two ways with data values of the pixel or grid cell (ISO 
19123). The data values of the image usually represent an average or integrated value that is associated with 
the entire pixel. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 125 
 


 


a) An image grid can be associated with data values such that the grid lines run through the centres of the 
pixels. The cell centres will thus have integer coordinate values. In this case the pixel in cell will have the 
value cell centre.  


b) Alternatively, the image grid may be defined such that the grid lines define the cell or pixel corners rather 
than the cell centres. The cell centres will thus have non-integer coordinate values, the fractional parts 
always being 0.5. ISO 19123 calls the grid points in this latter case posts and associated image data: 
matrix data. The pixel in cell will now have the value cell corner. 


This difference in perspective has no effect on image interpretation, but is important for coordinate 
transformations involving this image. 


12.5.1.5 Engineering datum 


An engineering datum is used in a local context, to describe the origin of an engineering (or local) coordinate 
reference system. 


12.5.1.6 Temporal datum 


A temporal datum is used to describe the origin of a temporal coordinate reference system. 


12.5.1.7 Schema introduction 


The datums.xsd schema has three logical parts, which define elements and types for XML encoding of the 
definitions of: 


a) Abstract datum 


b) Geodetic datums, including ellipsoid and prime meridian 


c) Multiple other concrete types of spatial-temporal datums 


This schema encodes the Datum package of the UML Model for OGC Abstract Specification Topic 2: Spatial 
Referencing by Coordinates. That UML model is adapted from ISO 19111 - Spatial referencing by 
coordinates, as described in Annex B of Topic 2. 


The datums schema includes the referenceSystems.xsd GML schema. This schema is identified by the 
following location-independent name (using URN syntax): 


urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-xsd: datums:v3.1.0 
 


12.5.2 Abstract datum 


12.5.2.1 gml:_Datum 


 <element name="_Datum" type="gml:AbstractDatumType" abstract="true" substitutionGroup="gml:Definition"/> 
 
 <complexType name="AbstractDatumType" abstract="true"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractDatumBaseType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:datumID" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:anchorPoint" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:realizationEpoch" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:validArea" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:scope" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


126  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 </complexType> 
 
 <complexType name="AbstractDatumBaseType" abstract="true"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:DefinitionType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:metaDataProperty" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:remarks" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:datumName"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute ref="gml:id" use="required"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
A datum specifies the relationship of a coordinate system to the earth, thus creating a coordinate reference 
system. A datum uses a parameter or set of parameters that determine the location of the origin of the 
coordinate reference system. Each datum subtype can be associated with only specific types of coordinate 
systems. This abstract complexType shall not be used, extended, or restricted, in an Application Schema, to 
define a concrete subtype with a meaning equivalent to a concrete subtype specified in this document. 


The AbstractDatumBaseType provides the basic encoding for datum objects, simplifying and restricting the 
DefinitionType as needed. 


The datumID" elements contain a set of alternative identifications of this datum. The first datumID, if any, is 
normally the primary identification code, and any others are aliases. 


The "remarks" element contains comments on or information about this reference system, including source 
information. 


12.5.2.2 gml:datumName 


 <element name="datumName" type="gml:SimpleNameType" substitutionGroup="gml:name"/> 
 
The name by which this datum is identified. 


12.5.2.3 gml:datumID 


 <element name="datumID" type="gml:IdentifierType"/> 
 
An identification of a datum. 


12.5.2.4 gml:anchorPoint 


 <element name="anchorPoint" type="gml:CodeType"/> 
 
Description, possibly including coordinates, of the point or points used to anchor the datum to the Earth. Also 
known as the "origin", especially for engineering and image datums. The codeSpace attribute can be used to 
reference a source of more detailed on this point or surface, or on a set of such descriptions. 


a) For a geodetic datum, this point is also known as the fundamental point, which is traditionally the point 
where the relationship between geoid and ellipsoid is defined. In some cases, the "fundamental point" 
may consist of a number of points. In those cases, the parameters defining the geoid/ellipsoid relationship 
have been averaged for these points, and the averages adopted as the datum definition. 


b) For an engineering datum, the anchor point may be a physical point, or it may be a point with defined 
coordinates in another CRS. When appropriate, the coordinates of this anchor point can be referenced in 
another document, such as referencing a GML feature that references or includes a point position. 


c) For an image datum, the anchor point is usually either the centre of the image or the corner of the image. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 127 
 


 


d) For a temporal datum, this attribute is not defined. Instead of the anchor point, a temporal datum carries a 
separate time origin of type DateTime. 


12.5.2.5 gml:realizationEpoch 


 <element name="realizationEpoch" type="date"/> 
 
The time after which this datum definition is valid. This time may be precise (e.g. 1997.0 for IRTF97) or merely 
a year (e.g. 1983 for NAD83). In the latter case, the epoch usually refers to the year in which a major 
recalculation of the geodetic control network, underlying the datum, was executed or initiated. An old datum 
can remain valid after a new datum is defined. Alternatively, a datum may be superseded by a later datum, in 
which case the realization epoch for the new datum defines the upper limit for the validity of the superseded 
datum. 


12.5.2.6 gml:datumRef 


 <element name="datumRef" type="gml:DatumRefType" substitutionGroup="gml:dictionaryEntry"/> 
 
 <complexType name="DatumRefType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:DictionaryEntryType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:_Datum" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Association to a datum, either referencing or containing the definition of that datum. 


12.5.3 Geodetic datum 


12.5.3.1 gml:GeodeticDatum 


 <element name="GeodeticDatum" type="gml:GeodeticDatumType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Datum"/> 
 
 <complexType name="GeodeticDatumType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractDatumType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:usesPrimeMeridian"/> 
     <element ref="gml:usesEllipsoid"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
A geodetic datum defines the precise location and orientation in 3-dimensional space of a defined ellipsoid (or 
sphere), or of a Cartesian coordinate system centered in this ellipsoid (or sphere). 


12.5.3.2 gml:usesPrimeMeridian 


 <element name="usesPrimeMeridian" type="gml:PrimeMeridianRefType"/> 
 
Association to the prime meridian used by this geodetic datum. 


12.5.3.3 gml:usesEllipsoid 


 <element name="usesEllipsoid" type="gml:EllipsoidRefType"/> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


128  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 
Association to the ellipsoid used by this geodetic datum. 


12.5.3.4 gml:geodeticDatumRef 


 <element name="geodeticDatumRef" type="gml:GeodeticDatumRefType" substitutionGroup="gml:datumRef"/> 
 
 <complexType name="GeodeticDatumRefType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:DatumRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:GeodeticDatum" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Association to a geodetic datum, either referencing or containing the definition of that datum. 


12.5.3.5 gml:Ellipsoid 


 <element name="Ellipsoid" type="gml:EllipsoidType" substitutionGroup="gml:Definition"/> 
 
 <complexType name="EllipsoidType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:EllipsoidBaseType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:ellipsoidID" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:semiMajorAxis"/> 
     <element ref="gml:secondDefiningParameter"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
 <complexType name="EllipsoidBaseType" abstract="true"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:DefinitionType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:metaDataProperty" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:remarks" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:ellipsoidName"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute ref="gml:id" use="required"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
An ellipsoid is a geometric figure that can be used to describe the approximate shape of the earth. In 
mathematical terms, it is a surface formed by the rotation of an ellipse about its minor axis. 


The EllipsoidBaseType provides the basic encoding for ellipsoid objects, simplifying and restricting the 
DefinitionType as needed. 


The ellipsoidID" elements contain a set of alternative identifications of this ellipsoid. The first ellipsoidID, if 
any, is normally the primary identification code, and any others are aliases. 


The "remarks" element contains comments on or information about this reference system, including source 
information. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 129 
 


 


12.5.3.6 gml:ellipsoidName 


 <element name="ellipsoidName" type="gml:SimpleNameType" substitutionGroup="gml:name"/> 
 
The name by which this ellipsoid is identified. 


12.5.3.7 gml:ellipsoidID 


 <element name="ellipsoidID" type="gml:IdentifierType"/> 
 
An identification of an ellipsoid. 


12.5.3.8 gml:semiMajorAxis 


 <element name="semiMajorAxis" type="gml:LengthType"/> 
 
Length of the semi-major axis of the ellipsoid. 


12.5.3.9 gml:ellipsoidRef 


 <element name="ellipsoidRef" type="gml:EllipsoidRefType" substitutionGroup="gml:dictionaryEntry"/> 
 
 <complexType name="EllipsoidRefType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:DictionaryEntryType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:Ellipsoid" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Association to an ellipsoid, either referencing or containing the definition of that ellipsoid. 


12.5.3.10 gml:secondDefiningParameter 


 <element name="secondDefiningParameter" type="gml:SecondDefiningParameterType"/> 
 
 <complexType name="SecondDefiningParameterType"> 
  <choice> 
   <element ref="gml:inverseFlattening"/> 
   <element ref="gml:semiMinorAxis"/> 
   <element ref="gml:isSphere"/> 
  </choice> 
 </complexType> 
 
Definition of the second parameter that defines the shape of an ellipsoid. An ellipsoid requires two defining 
parameters: semi-major axis and inverse flattening or semi-major axis and semi-minor axis. When the 
reference body is a sphere rather than an ellipsoid, only a single defining parameter is required, namely the 
radius of the sphere; in that case, the semi-major axis "degenerates" into the radius of the sphere. 


12.5.3.11 gml:inverseFlattening 


 <element name="inverseFlattening" type="gml:ScaleType"/> 
 
Inverse flattening value of the ellipsoid 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


130  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


12.5.3.12 gml:semiMinorAxis 


 <element name="semiMinorAxis" type="gml:LengthType"/> 
 
Length of the semi-minor axis of the ellipsoid. 


12.5.3.13 gml:isSphere 


 <element name="isSphere"> 
  <simpleType> 
   <restriction base="string"> 
    <enumeration value="sphere"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </simpleType> 
 </element> 
 
When this element is included, the ellipsoid is degenerate and is actually a sphere. The sphere is completely 
defined by the semi-major axis, which is the radius of the sphere. 


12.5.3.14 gml:PrimeMeridian 


 <element name="PrimeMeridian" type="gml:PrimeMeridianType" substitutionGroup="gml:Definition"/> 
 
 <complexType name="PrimeMeridianType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:PrimeMeridianBaseType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:meridianID" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:greenwichLongitude"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
 <complexType name="PrimeMeridianBaseType" abstract="true"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:DefinitionType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:metaDataProperty" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:remarks" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:meridianName"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute ref="gml:id" use="required"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
A prime meridian defines the origin from which longitude values are determined. 


The PrimeMeridianBaseType provides the basic encoding for prime meridian objects, simplifying and 
restricting the DefinitionType as needed. 


The "meridianID" elements contain a set of alternative identifications of this prime meridian. The first 
meridianID, if any, is normally the primary identification code, and any others are aliases. 


The "remarks" element contains comments on or information about this reference system, including source 
information. 


12.5.3.15 gml:meridianName 


 <element name="meridianName" type="gml:SimpleNameType" substitutionGroup="gml:name"/> 
 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 131 
 


 


The name by which this prime meridian is identified. The meridianName most common value is Greenwich, 
and that value shall be used when the greenwichLongitude value is zero. 


12.5.3.16 gml:meridianID 


 <element name="meridianID" type="gml:IdentifierType"/> 
 
An identification of a prime meridian. 


12.5.3.17 gml:greenwichLongitude 


 <element name="greenwichLongitude" type="gml:AngleChoiceType"/> 
 
Longitude of the prime meridian measured from the Greenwich meridian, positive eastward. The 
greenwichLongitude most common value is zero, and that value shall be used when the meridianName value 
is Greenwich. 


12.5.3.18 gml:primeMeridianRef 


 <element name="primeMeridianRef" type="gml:PrimeMeridianRefType" substitutionGroup="gml:dictionaryEntry"/> 
 
 <complexType name="PrimeMeridianRefType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:DictionaryEntryType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:PrimeMeridian" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Association to a prime meridian, either referencing or containing the definition of that meridian. 


12.5.4 Other concrete datums 


12.5.4.1 gml:EngineeringDatum 


 <element name="EngineeringDatum" type="gml:EngineeringDatumType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Datum"/> 
 
 <complexType name="EngineeringDatumType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractDatumType"/> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
An engineering datum defines the origin of an engineering coordinate reference system, and is used in a 
region around that origin. This origin can be fixed with respect to the earth (such as a defined point at a 
construction site), or be a defined point on a moving vehicle (such as on a ship or satellite). 


12.5.4.2 gml:engineeringDatumRef 


 <element name="engineeringDatumRef" type="gml:EngineeringDatumRefType" substitutionGroup="gml:datumRef"/> 
 
 <complexType name="EngineeringDatumRefType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:DatumRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:EngineeringDatum" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


132  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Association to an engineering datum, either referencing or containing the definition of that datum. 


12.5.4.3 gml:ImageDatum 


 <element name="ImageDatum" type="gml:ImageDatumType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Datum"/> 
 
 <complexType name="ImageDatumType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractDatumType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:pixelInCell"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
An image datum defines the origin of an image coordinate reference system, and is used in a local context 
only. For more information, see Subclause 12.5.1. 


12.5.4.4 gml:pixelInCell 


 <element name="pixelInCell" type="gml:PixelInCellType"/> 
 
 <complexType name="PixelInCellType"> 
  <simpleContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:CodeType"> 
    <attribute name="codeSpace" type="anyURI" use="required"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </simpleContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Specification of the way an image grid is associated with the image data attributes. The required codeSpace 
attribute shall reference a source of information specifying the values and meanings of all the allowed string 
values for this PixelInCellType. 


12.5.4.5 gml:imageDatumRef 


 <element name="imageDatumRef" type="gml:ImageDatumRefType" substitutionGroup="gml:datumRef"/> 
 
 <complexType name="ImageDatumRefType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:DatumRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:ImageDatum" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Association to an image datum, either referencing or containing the definition of that datum. 


12.5.4.6 gml:VerticalDatum 


 <element name="VerticalDatum" type="gml:VerticalDatumType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Datum"/> 
 
 <complexType name="VerticalDatumType"> 
  <complexContent> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 133 
 


 


   <extension base="gml:AbstractDatumType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:verticalDatumType" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
A textual description and/or a set of parameters identifying a particular reference level surface used as a zero-
height surface, including its position with respect to the Earth for any of the height types recognized by this 
standard. There are several types of Vertical Datums, and each may place constraints on the Coordinate Axis 
with which it is combined to create a Vertical CRS. 


12.5.4.7 gml:verticalDatumType 


 <element name="verticalDatumType " type="gml:VerticalDatumTypeType"/> 
 
 <complexType name="VerticalDatumTypeType"> 
  <simpleContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:CodeType"> 
    <attribute name="codeSpace" type="anyURI" use="required"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </simpleContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Type of a vertical datum. The required codeSpace attribute shall reference a source of information specifying 
the values and meanings of all the allowed string values for this VerticalDatumTypeType. 


12.5.4.8 gml:verticalDatumRef 


 <element name="verticalDatumRef" type="gml:VerticalDatumRefType" substitutionGroup="gml:datumRef"/> 
 
 <complexType name="VerticalDatumRefType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:DatumRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:VerticalDatum" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Association to a vertical datum, either referencing or containing the definition of that datum. 


12.5.4.9 gml:TemporalDatum 


 <element name="TemporalDatum" type="gml:TemporalDatumType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Datum"/> 
 
 <complexType name="TemporalDatumType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:TemporalDatumBaseType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:origin"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
 <complexType name="TemporalDatumBaseType" abstract="true"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:AbstractDatumType"> 
    <sequence> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


134  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


     <element ref="gml:metaDataProperty" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:datumName"/> 
     <element ref="gml:datumID" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:validArea" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:scope" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute ref="gml:id" use="required"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
A temporal datum defines the origin of a temporal coordinate reference system. This type extends the 
TemporalDatumRestrictionType to add the "origin" element with the dateTime type. 


The TemporalDatumBaseType partially defines the origin of a temporal coordinate reference system. This 
type restricts the AbstractDatumType to remove the "anchorPoint" and "realizationEpoch" elements. 


12.5.4.10 gml:origin 


 <element name="origin" type="dateTime"/> 
 
The date and time origin of this temporal datum. 


12.5.4.11 gml:temporalDatumRef 


 <element name="temporalDatumRef" type="gml:TemporalDatumRefType" substitutionGroup="gml:datumRef"/> 
 
 <complexType name="TemporalDatumRefType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:DatumRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:TemporalDatum" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Association to a temporal datum, either referencing or containing the definition of that datum. 


12.6 coordinateOperations schema 


12.6.1 Overview 


12.6.1.1 Introduction 


A coordinate operation defines the coordinate transformation or conversion between coordinates in two 
different coordinate reference systems. Provided the relationship between any two coordinate reference 
systems is known, coordinates can be transformed or converted to another coordinate reference system. 


A coordinate operation therefore usually specifies a source and target coordinate reference system. For that 
reason a coordinate operation is often popularly said to operate between two coordinate reference systems. 
Although this wording may be good enough for conversation, it must be realised that coordinate operations do 
not operate on coordinate reference systems, but on coordinates. This fact is important because of its 
implication that coordinate reference systems cannot be created from another coordinate reference system 
by means of a coordinate operation. Neither can a coordinate operation be used to modify the definition of a 
coordinate reference system, e.g., by converting the units of measure of the coordinates.  







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 135 
 


 


12.6.1.2 Coordinate operation types 


Coordinate operations are divided into four types: 


a) Coordinate conversion  mathematical operation on coordinates that does not include any change of 
Datum. The best-known example of a coordinate conversion is a map projection. The parameters 
describing coordinate conversions are defined rather than empirically derived. Please note that some 
conversions have no parameters. 


b) Coordinate transformation  mathematical operation on coordinates that includes a change of Datum. The 
parameters of a coordinate transformation are empirically derived from a dataset containing the 
coordinates of a series of points in both coordinate reference systems. This computational process is 
usually overdetermined, allowing derivation of error (or accuracy) estimates for the transformation. Also, 
the stochastic nature of the parameters may result in multiple (different) instantiations of the same 
coordinate transformation. 


c) Concatenated operation  sequential application of two or more coordinate transformations and/or 
conversions. 


d) Pass through operation  application of a specified coordinate conversion or transformation to convert a 
subset of the coordinates of a compound CRS. 


A coordinate transformation or conversion can be time-varying, and shall be time-varying if either the source 
or target CRS is time varying. When the coordinate operation is time-varying, the operation method used will 
also be time-varying, and some of the parameters used by that operation method will involve time. For 
example, some of the parameters may have time, speed, and/or acceleration values and units. The variables 
used in the operation method algorithm may include time explicitly or only implicitly (for example, time may be 
an unspecified function of other variables). 


12.6.1.3 Coordinate conversions 


Coordinate conversions are coordinate operations that make use of exact, defined (rather than measured or 
computed), and therefore error-free parameter values. Corresponding pairs of coordinate tuples in each of the 
two coordinate reference systems connected through a coordinate conversion have a fixed arithmetic 
relationship. Additionally one of the two tuples cannot exist without specification of the coordinate conversion 
and the source coordinate reference system. Coordinate conversions are therefore intimately related to the 
earlier-defined concept of Derived CRSs.  


The best-known example of this source-derived relationship is a projected coordinate reference system, which 
is always based on a source geographic coordinate reference system. The associated map projection 
effectively defines the projected coordinate reference system from the geographic coordinate system. This 
concept is modelled as a direct link between coordinate reference system and coordinate conversion. 


Please note that this does not contradict the statement above that a coordinate operation cannot be used to 
create or modify a coordinate reference system in a software implementation. The text above describes a 
static source-result relationship between coordinates in the two coordinate reference systems. For such 
defining coordinate conversions, no source and target coordinate reference system are defined. The usage of 
such a coordinate conversion is in the coordinate reference system, which will point to that conversion and to 
its source coordinate reference system. 


The source and target coordinate reference system of a coordinate conversion are defined in the 
GeneralDerivedCRS, by specifying the base (i.e., source) CRS and the defining conversion. The derived 
coordinate reference system itself is the target CRS in this situation.  


12.6.1.4 Concatenated coordinate operation 


A concatenated coordinate operation is an ordered sequence of coordinate operations. The sequence of 
operations is constrained by the requirement that the source coordinate reference system of step (n+1) shall 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


136  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


be the same as the target coordinate reference system of step (n). The source coordinate reference system of 
the first step and the target coordinate reference system of the last step are the source and target coordinate 
reference system associated with the concatenated operation. 


The above constraint should not be interpreted as implying that only those coordinate operations can be used 
in a concatenated operation that have their source and a target coordinate reference system specified through 
the association pair between a CoordinateOperation and a CRS. This would exclude coordinate conversions. 
Concatenated coordinate operations may contain coordinate transformations and/or coordinate conversions. 
When used in a concatenated operation, the conversions source and target coordinate reference system are 
equally subject to the above constraint as the source and target of a transformation although they are 
specified in a different manner. 


12.6.1.5 Pass-through coordinate operation 


Coordinate operations require input coordinate tuples of certain dimensions, and produce output tuples of 
certain dimensions. The dimensions of these coordinate tuples and the dimensions of the coordinate 
reference system they are defined in shall be the same. 


The ability to define compound coordinate reference systems combining two or more other coordinate 
reference systems, not themselves compound, introduces a difficulty. For example, it may be required to 
transform only the horizontal or only the vertical component of a compound coordinate reference system, 
which will put them at odds with coordinate operations specified for either horizontal or vertical coordinates 
only. To the human mind this is a trivial problem, but not so for coordinate transformation software that ought 
to be capable of automatic operation, without human intervention. The software logic would be confronted with 
the problem of having to apply a 2-dimensional coordinate operation to 3-dimensional coordinate tuples. 


This problem has been solved by defining a pass-through operation. This operation specifies what subset of a 
coordinate tuple is subject to a requested transformation. It takes the form of referencing another coordinate 
operation and specifying a sequence of numbers defining the positions in the coordinate tuple of the 
coordinates affected by that transformation.  


NOTE. The order of the coordinates in a coordinate tuple shall agree with the order of the coordinate system axes as 
defined for the associated coordinate system. 


12.6.1.6 Operation method and parameters 


The algorithm used to execute the coordinate operation is defined in the operation method. Concatenated 
operations and pass-through operations do not require a coordinate operation to be specified. Each operation 
method uses a number of parameters (although some coordinate conversions use none), and each coordinate 
operation assigns value to these parameters. 


Most parameter values are numeric, but for some operation methods, notably those implementing a grid 
interpolation algorithm, the parameter value could be a file name and location (this may be a URI). An 
example is the coordinate transformation from NAD 27 to NAD 83 in the USA; depending on the locations of 
the points to be transformed, one of a series of grid files should be used. 


As this class comes close to the heart of any coordinate transformation software, it is recommended to make 
extensive use of identifiers, referencing well-known datasets wherever possible. There is as yet no standard 
way of spelling or even naming the various coordinate operation methods. Client software requesting a 
coordinate operation to be executed by a coordinate transformation server implementation may therefore ask 
for an operation method this server doesnt recognise, although a perfectly valid method may be available. 
The same holds for coordinate operation parameters used by any coordinate operation method. 


To facilitate recognition and validation, the operation formulae shall be included or referenced in an operation 
method, and if possible a worked example. 


Some operation methods may require a large number of operation parameters. Also, some operation methods 
require that groups of parameters be repeatable as a group. In such cases, it is helpful to group related 
parameters in parameter groups. Two or more parameter groups are then associated with a particular 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 137 
 


 


coordinate operation method, and each parameter group consists of a set of operation parameters, or of other 
nested parameter groups. This way of modelling is not mandatory; all operation parameters can be directly 
associated with the operation method. 


12.6.1.7 Schema introduction 


The spatial-temporal coordinate operations schema, coordinateOperations.xsd, has five logical parts, which 
define elements and types for XML encoding of the definitions of: 


a) Multiple abstract coordinate operations 


b) Multiple concrete types of coordinate operations, including Transformations and Conversions 


c) Abstract and concrete parameter values and groups 


d) Operation methods 


e) Abstract and concrete operation parameters and groups 


This schema encodes the Coordinate Operation package of the UML Model for OGC Abstract Specification 
Topic 2: Spatial Referencing by Coordinates. That UML model is adapted from ISO 19111 - Spatial 
referencing by coordinates, as described in Annex B of Topic 2. 


The coordinateOperations schema includes the coordinateReferenceSystems.xsd and dataQuality.xsd GML 
schemas. This schema is identified by the following location-independent name (using URN syntax): 


urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-xsd: coordinateOperations:v3.1.0 
 


12.6.2 Abstract coordinate operations 


12.6.2.1 gml:_CoordinateOperation 


 <element name="_CoordinateOperation" type="gml:AbstractCoordinateOperationType" abstract="true" 
 substitutionGroup="gml:Definition"/> 
 


 <complexType name="AbstractCoordinateOperationType" abstract="true"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCoordinateOperationBaseType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:coordinateOperationID" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:operationVersion" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:validArea" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:scope" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:_positionalAccuracy" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:sourceCRS" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:targetCRS" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
 <complexType name="AbstractCoordinateOperationBaseType" abstract="true"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:DefinitionType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:metaDataProperty" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:remarks" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:coordinateOperationName"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute ref="gml:id" use="required"/> 
   </restriction> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


138  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
A mathematical operation on coordinates that transforms or converts coordinates to another coordinate 
reference system. Many but not all coordinate operations (from CRS A to CRS B) also uniquely define the 
inverse operation (from CRS B to CRS A). In some cases, the operation method algorithm for the inverse 
operation is the same as for the forward algorithm, but the signs of some operation parameter values shall be 
reversed. In other cases, different algorithms are required for the forward and inverse operations, but the 
same operation parameter values are used. If (some) entirely different parameter values are needed, a 
different coordinate operation shall be defined. 


The AbstractCoordinateOperationBaseType provides the basic encoding for coordinate operation objects, 
simplifying and restricting the DefinitionType as needed. 


The optional _positionalAccuracy elements provide an unordered set of estimates of the impact of this 
coordinate operation on point position accuracy. This element provides position error estimates for target 
coordinates of this coordinate operation, assuming no errors in source coordinates. 


The coordinateOperationID" elements contain a set of alternative identifications of this coordinate operation. 
The first coordinateOperationID, if any, is normally the primary identification code, and any others are aliases. 


The "remarks" element contains comments on or information about this reference system, including source 
information. 


12.6.2.2 gml:coordinateOperationName 


 <element name="coordinateOperationName" type="gml:SimpleNameType" substitutionGroup="gml:name"/> 
 
The name by which this coordinate operation is identified. 


12.6.2.3 gml:coordinateOperationID 


 <element name="coordinateOperationID" type="gml:IdentifierType"/> 
 
An identification of a coordinate operation. 


12.6.2.4 gml:operationVersion 


 <element name="operationVersion" type="string"/> 
 
Version of the coordinate transformation (i.e., instantiation due to the stochastic nature of the parameters). 
Mandatory when describing a transformation, and should not be supplied for a conversion. 


12.6.2.5 gml:sourceCRS 


 <element name="sourceCRS" type="gml:CRSRefType"/> 
 
Association to the source CRS (coordinate reference system) of this coordinate operation. 


12.6.2.6 gml:targetCRS 


 <element name="targetCRS" type="gml:CRSRefType"/> 
 
Association to the target CRS (coordinate reference system) of this coordinate operation. For constraints on 
multiplicity of "sourceCRS" and "targetCRS", see Subclause 12.6.1. 


12.6.2.7 gml:coordinateOperationRef 


 <element name="coordinateOperationRef" type="gml:CoordinateOperationRefType" 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 139 
 


 


 substitutionGroup="gml:dictionaryEntry"/> 
 


 <complexType name="CoordinateOperationRefType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:DictionaryEntryType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:_CoordinateOperation" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Association to a coordinate operation, either referencing or containing the definition of that coordinate 
operation. 


12.6.2.8 gml:_SingleOperation 


 <element name="_SingleOperation" type="gml:AbstractSingleOperationType" abstract="true" 
 substitutionGroup="gml:_CoordinateOperation"/> 
 


 <complexType name="AbstractSingleOperationType" abstract="true"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCoordinateOperationType"/> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
A single (not concatenated) coordinate operation. 


12.6.2.9 gml:singleOperationRef 


 <element name="singleOperationRef" type="gml:SingleOperationRefType" 
 substitutionGroup="gml:coordinateOperationRef"/> 
 


 <complexType name="SingleOperationRefType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:CoordinateOperationRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:_SingleOperation" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Association to a single operation, either referencing or containing the definition of that single operation. 


12.6.2.10 gml:_Operation 


 <element name="_Operation" type="gml:AbstractOperationType" abstract="true" 
 substitutionGroup="gml:_SingleOperation"/> 
 


 <complexType name="AbstractOperationType" abstract="true"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractSingleOperationType"/> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
A parameterized mathematical operation on coordinates that transforms or converts coordinates to another 
coordinate reference system. This coordinate operation uses an operation method, usually with associated 
parameter values. However, operation methods and parameter values are directly associated with concrete 
subtypes, not with this abstract type. 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


140  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


This abstract complexType shall not be directly used, extended, or restricted in a compliant Application 
Schema. 


12.6.2.11 gml:operationRef 


 <element name="operationRef" type="gml:OperationRefType" substitutionGroup="gml:singleOperationRef"/> 
 
 <complexType name="OperationRefType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:SingleOperationRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:_Operation" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Association to an abstract operation, either referencing or containing the definition of that operation. 


12.6.2.12 gml:_GeneralConversion 


 <element name="_GeneralConversion" type="gml:AbstractGeneralConversionType" abstract="true"  
substitutionGroup="gml:_Operation"/> 


 
 <complexType name="AbstractGeneralConversionType" abstract="true"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:AbstractOperationType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:metaDataProperty" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:remarks" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:coordinateOperationName"/> 
     <element ref="gml:coordinateOperationID" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:validArea" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:scope" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:_positionalAccuracy" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute ref="gml:id" use="required"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
An abstract operation on coordinates that does not include any change of datum. The best-known example of 
a coordinate conversion is a map projection. The parameters describing coordinate conversions are defined 
rather than empirically derived. Note that some conversions have no parameters. 


This abstract complexType is expected to be extended for well-known operation methods with many 
Conversion instances, in Application Schemas that define operation-method-specialized element names and 
contents. This conversion uses an operation method, usually with associated parameter values. However, 
operation methods and parameter values are directly associated with concrete subtypes, not with this abstract 
type. All concrete types derived from this type shall extend this type to include a "usesMethod" element that 
references the "OperationMethod" element. Similarly, all concrete types derived from this type shall extend 
this type to include zero or more elements each named "uses...Value" that each use the type of an element 
substitutable for the "_generalParameterValue" element. 


12.6.2.13 gml:generalConversionRef 


 <element name="generalConversionRef" type="gml:GeneralConversionRefType" 
 substitutionGroup="gml:operationRef"/> 
 


 <complexType name="GeneralConversionRefType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:OperationRefType"> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 141 
 


 


    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:_GeneralConversion" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Association to a general conversion, either referencing or containing the definition of that conversion. 


12.6.2.14 gml:_GeneralTransformation 


 <element name="_GeneralTransformation" type="gml:AbstractGeneralTransformationType" abstract="true" 
 substitutionGroup="gml:_Operation"/> 
 


 <complexType name="AbstractGeneralTransformationType" abstract="true"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:AbstractOperationType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:metaDataProperty" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:remarks" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:coordinateOperationName"/> 
     <element ref="gml:coordinateOperationID" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:operationVersion"/> 
     <element ref="gml:validArea" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:scope" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:_positionalAccuracy" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:sourceCRS"/> 
     <element ref="gml:targetCRS"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute ref="gml:id" use="required"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
An abstract operation on coordinates that usually includes a change of Datum. The parameters of a 
coordinate transformation are empirically derived from data containing the coordinates of a series of points in 
both coordinate reference systems. This computational process is usually "over-determined", allowing 
derivation of error (or accuracy) estimates for the transformation. Also, the stochastic nature of the parameters 
may result in multiple (different) versions of the same coordinate transformation. 


This abstract complexType is expected to be extended for well-known operation methods with many 
Transformation instances, in Application Schemas that define operation-method-specialized value element 
names and contents. This transformation uses an operation method with associated parameter values. 
However, operation methods and parameter values are directly associated with concrete subtypes, not with 
this abstract type. All concrete types derived from this type shall extend this type to include a "usesMethod" 
element that references one "OperationMethod" element. Similarly, all concrete types derived from this type 
shall extend this type to include one or more elements each named "uses...Value" that each use the type of 
an element substitutable for the "_generalParameterValue" element. 


12.6.2.15 gml:generalTransformationRef 


 <element name="generalTransformationRef" type="gml:GeneralTransformationRefType" 
 substitutionGroup="gml:operationRef"/> 
 


 <complexType name="GeneralTransformationRefType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:OperationRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:_GeneralTransformation" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


142  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Association to a general transformation, either referencing or containing the definition of that transformation. 


12.6.3 Concrete coordinate operations 


12.6.3.1 gml:ConcatenatedOperation 


 <element name="ConcatenatedOperation" type="gml:ConcatenatedOperationType" 
 substitutionGroup="gml:_CoordinateOperation"/> 
 


 <complexType name="ConcatenatedOperationType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCoordinateOperationType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:usesSingleOperation" minOccurs="2" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
A concatenated operation is an ordered sequence of two or more single coordinate operations. The sequence 
of operations is constrained by the requirement that the source coordinate reference system of step (n+1) 
shall be the same as the target coordinate reference system of step (n). The source coordinate reference 
system of the first step and the target coordinate reference system of the last step are the source and target 
coordinate reference system associated with the concatenated operation. Instead of a forward operation, an 
inverse operation may be used for one or more of the operation steps mentioned above, if the inverse 
operation is uniquely defined by the forward operation. 


The usesSingleOperation elements are an ordered sequence of associations to the two or more single 
operations used by this concatenated operation. 


12.6.3.2 gml:usesSingleOperation 


 <element name="usesSingleOperation" type="gml:SingleOperationRefType"/> 
 
Association to a single operation. 


12.6.3.3 gml:concatenatedOperationRef 


 <element name="concatenatedOperationRef" type="gml:ConcatenatedOperationRefType" 
 substitutionGroup="gml:coordinateOperationRef"/> 
 


 <complexType name="ConcatenatedOperationRefType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:CoordinateOperationRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:ConcatenatedOperation" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Association to a concatenated operation, either referencing or containing the definition of that concatenated 
operation. 


12.6.3.4 gml:PassThroughOperation 


 <element name="PassThroughOperation" type="gml:PassThroughOperationType" 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 143 
 


 


 substitutionGroup="gml:_SingleOperation"/> 
 


 <complexType name="PassThroughOperationType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractSingleOperationType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:modifiedCoordinate" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:usesOperation"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
A pass-through operation specifies that a subset of a coordinate tuple is subject to a specific coordinate 
operation. 


The modifiedCoordinate elements are an ordered sequence of positive integers defining the positions in a 
coordinate tuple of the coordinates affected by this pass-through operation. 


12.6.3.5 gml:modifiedCoordinate 


 <element name="modifiedCoordinate" type="positiveInteger"/> 
 


12.6.3.6 A positive integer defining a position in a coordinate tuple.gml:usesOperation 


 <element name="usesOperation" type="gml:OperationRefType"/> 
 
Association to the operation applied to the specified ordinates. 


12.6.3.7 gml:passThroughOperationRef 


 <element name="passThroughOperationRef" type="gml:PassThroughOperationRefType" 
 substitutionGroup="gml:singleOperationRef"/> 
 


 <complexType name="PassThroughOperationRefType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:SingleOperationRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:PassThroughOperation" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Association to a pass through operation, either referencing or containing the definition of that pass through 
operation. 


12.6.3.8 gml:Conversion 


 <element name="Conversion" type="gml:ConversionType" substitutionGroup="gml:_GeneralConversion"/> 
 
 <complexType name="ConversionType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGeneralConversionType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:usesMethod"/> 
     <element ref="gml:usesValue" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


144  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 
A concrete operation on coordinates that does not include any change of Datum. The best-known example of 
a coordinate conversion is a map projection. The parameters describing coordinate conversions are defined 
rather than empirically derived. Note that some conversions have no parameters. 


This concrete complexType can be used with all operation methods, without using an Application Schema that 
defines operation-method-specialized element names and contents, especially for methods with only one 
Conversion instance. 


The usesValue elements are an unordered list of composition associations to the set of parameter values 
used by this conversion operation. 


12.6.3.9 gml:usesMethod 


 <element name="usesMethod" type="gml:OperationMethodRefType"/> 
 
Association to the operation method used by this coordinate operation. 


12.6.3.10 gml:usesValue 


 <element name="usesValue" type="gml:ParameterValueType"/> 
 


12.6.3.11 Composition association to a parameter value used by this coordinate 
operation.gml:conversionRef 


 <element name="conversionRef" type="gml:ConversionRefType" substitutionGroup="gml:generalConversionRef"/> 
 
 <complexType name="ConversionRefType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:GeneralConversionRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:Conversion" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Association to a concrete general-purpose conversion, either referencing or containing the definition of that 
conversion. 


12.6.3.12 gml:Transformation 


 <element name="Transformation" type="gml:TransformationType" 
 substitutionGroup="gml:_GeneralTransformation"/> 
 


 <complexType name="TransformationType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGeneralTransformationType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:usesMethod"/> 
     <element ref="gml:usesValue" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
A concrete operation on coordinates that usually includes a change of datum. The parameters of a coordinate 
transformation are empirically derived from data containing the coordinates of a series of points in both 
coordinate reference systems. This computational process is usually "over-determined", allowing derivation of 
error (or accuracy) estimates for the transformation. Also, the stochastic nature of the parameters may result 
in multiple (different) versions of the same coordinate transformation. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 145 
 


 


This concrete complexType can be used for operation methods, without using an Application Schema that 
defines operation-method-specialized element names and contents, especially for methods with only one 
Transformation instance. 


The usesValue elements are an unordered list of composition associations to the set of parameter values 
used by this transformation operation. 


12.6.3.13 gml:transformationRef 


 <element name="transformationRef" type="gml:TransformationRefType" 
 substitutionGroup="gml:generalTransformationRef"/> 
 


 <complexType name="TransformationRefType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:GeneralTransformationRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:Transformation" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Association to a transformation, either referencing or containing the definition of that transformation. 


12.6.4 Parameter values and groups 


12.6.4.1 gml:_generalParameterValue 


 <element name="_generalParameterValue" type="gml:AbstractGeneralParameterValueType" abstract="true"/> 
 
 <complexType name="AbstractGeneralParameterValueType" abstract="true"> 
  <sequence/> 
 </complexType> 
 
Abstract parameter value or group of parameter values. 


This abstract complexType is expected to be extended and restricted for well-known operation methods with 
many instances, in Application Schemas that define operation-method-specialized element names and 
contents. Specific parameter value elements are directly contained in concrete subtypes, not in this abstract 
type. All concrete types derived from this type shall extend this type to include one "...Value" element with an 
appropriate type, which should be one of the element types allowed in the ParameterValueType. In addition, 
all derived concrete types shall extend this type to include a "valueOfParameter" element that references one 
element substitutable for the "OperationParameter" element. 


12.6.4.2 gml:parameterValue 


 <element name="parameterValue" type="gml:ParameterValueType" 
 substitutionGroup="gml:_generalParameterValue"/> 
 


 <complexType name="ParameterValueType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGeneralParameterValueType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <choice> 
      <element ref="gml:value"/> 
      <element ref="gml:dmsAngleValue"/> 
      <element ref="gml:stringValue"/> 
      <element ref="gml:integerValue"/> 
      <element ref="gml:booleanValue"/> 
      <element ref="gml:valueList"/> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


146  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


      <element ref="gml:integerValueList"/> 
      <element ref="gml:valueFile"/> 
     </choice> 
     <element ref="gml:valueOfParameter"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
A parameter value, ordered sequence of values, or reference to a file of parameter values. This concrete 
complexType can be used for operation methods without using an Application Schema that defines operation-
method-specialized element names and contents, especially for methods with only one instance. This 
complexType can be used, extended, or restricted for well-known operation methods, especially for methods 
with many instances. 


12.6.4.3 gml:value 


 <element name="value" type="gml:MeasureType"/> 
 
Numeric value of an operation parameter, with its associated unit of measure. 


12.6.4.4 gml:dmsAngleValue 


 <element name="dmsAngleValue" type="gml:DMSAngleType"/> 
 
Value of an angle operation parameter, in either degree-minute-second format or single value format. 


12.6.4.5 gml:stringValue 


 <element name="stringValue" type="string"/> 
 
String value of an operation parameter. A string value does not have an associated unit of measure. 


12.6.4.6 gml:integerValue 


 <element name="integerValue" type="positiveInteger"/> 
 
Positive integer value of an operation parameter, usually used for a count. An integer value does not have an 
associated unit of measure. 


12.6.4.7 gml:booleanValue 


 <element name="booleanValue" type="boolean"/> 
 
Boolean value of an operation parameter. A Boolean value does not have an associated unit of measure. 


12.6.4.8 gml:valueList 


 <element name="valueList" type="gml:MeasureListType"/> 
 
Ordered sequence of two or more numeric values of an operation parameter list, where each value has the 
same associated unit of measure. An element of this type contains a space-separated sequence of double 
values. 


12.6.4.9 gml:integerValueList 


 <element name="integerValueList" type="gml:integerList"/> 
 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 147 
 


 


Ordered sequence of two or more integer values of an operation parameter list, usually used for counts. 
These integer values do not have an associated unit of measure. An element of this type contains a space-
separated sequence of integer values. 


12.6.4.10 gml:valueFile 


 <element name="valueFile" type="anyURI"/> 
 
Reference to a file or a part of a file containing one or more parameter values, each numeric value with its 
associated unit of measure. When referencing a part of a file, that file shall contain multiple identified parts, 
such as an XML encoded document. Furthermore, the referenced file or part of a file can reference another 
part of the same or different files, as allowed in XML documents. 


12.6.4.11 gml:valueOfParameter 


 <element name="valueOfParameter" type="gml:OperationParameterRefType"/> 
 
Association to the operation parameter that this is a value of. 


12.6.4.12 gml:parameterValueGroup 


 <element name="parameterValueGroup" type="gml:ParameterValueGroupType" 
 substitutionGroup="gml:_generalParameterValue"/> 
 


 <complexType name="ParameterValueGroupType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGeneralParameterValueType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:includesValue" minOccurs="2" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:valuesOfGroup"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
A group of related parameter values. The same group can be repeated more than once in a Conversion, 
Transformation, or higher level parameterValueGroup, if those instances contain different values of one or 
more parameterValues which suitably distinquish among those groups. This concrete complexType can be 
used for operation methods without using an Application Schema that defines operation-method-specialized 
element names and contents. This complexType can be used, extended, or restricted for well-known 
operation methods, especially for methods with only one instance. 


The includesValue elements are an unordered set of composition associations to the parameter values and 
groups of values included in this group. 


12.6.4.13 gml:includesValue 


 <element name="includesValue" type="gml:AbstractGeneralParameterValueType" 
 substitutionGroup="gml:_generalParameterValue"/> 
 


A composition association to a parameter value or group of values included in this group. 


12.6.4.14 gml:valuesOfGroup 


 <element name="valuesOfGroup" type="gml:OperationParameterGroupRefType"/> 
 
Association to the operation parameter group for which this element provides parameter values. 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


148  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


12.6.5 Operation method 


12.6.5.1 gml:OperationMethod 


 <element name="OperationMethod" type="gml:OperationMethodType" substitutionGroup="gml:Definition"/> 
 
 <complexType name="OperationMethodType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:OperationMethodBaseType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:methodID" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:methodFormula"/> 
     <element ref="gml:usesParameter" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
 <complexType name="OperationMethodBaseType" abstract="true"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:DefinitionType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:metaDataProperty" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:remarks" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:methodName"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute ref="gml:id" use="required"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Definition of an algorithm used to perform a coordinate operation. Most operation methods use a number of 
operation parameters, although some coordinate conversions use none. Each coordinate operation using the 
method assigns values to these parameters. 


The methodID elements contain a set of alternative identifications of this operation method. The first 
methodID, if any, is normally the primary identification code, and any others are aliases. 


The usesParameter elements are an unordered list of associations to the set of operation parameters and 
parameter groups used by this operation method. 


The OperationMethodBaseType provides the basic encoding for operation method objects, simplifying and 
restricting the DefinitionType as needed. 


The "remarks" element contains comments on or information about this reference system, including source 
information. 


12.6.5.2 gml:methodName 


 <element name="methodName" type="gml:SimpleNameType" substitutionGroup="gml:name"/> 
 
The name by which an operation method is identified. 


12.6.5.3 gml:methodID 


 <element name="methodID" type="gml:IdentifierType"/> 
 
An identification of this operation method. 


12.6.5.4 gml:methodFormula 


 <element name="methodFormula" type="gml:CodeType"/> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 149 
 


 


 
Formula(s) used by this operation method. The value may be a reference to a publication. Note that the 
operation method may not be analytic, in which case this element references or contains the procedure, not 
an analytic formula. 


12.6.5.5 gml:sourceDimensions 


 <element name="sourceDimensions" type="positiveInteger"/> 
 
Number of dimensions in the source CRS of this operation method. 


12.6.5.6 gml:targetDimensions 


 <element name="targetDimensions" type="positiveInteger"/> 
 
Number of dimensions in the target CRS of this operation method 


12.6.5.7 gml:usesParameter 


 <element name="usesParameter" type="gml:AbstractGeneralOperationParameterRefType"/> 
 
Association to an operation parameter or parameter group used by this operation method. 


12.6.5.8 gml:operationMethodRef 


 <element name="operationMethodRef" type="gml:OperationMethodRefType" 
 substitutionGroup="gml:dictionaryEntry"/> 
 


 <complexType name="OperationMethodRefType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:DictionaryEntryType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:OperationMethod" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Association to a concrete general-purpose operation method, either referencing or containing the definition of 
that method. 


12.6.6 Operation parameters and groups 


12.6.6.1 gml:GeneralOperationParameter 


 <element name="_GeneralOperationParameter" type="gml:AbstractGeneralOperationParameterType" 
 abstract="true" substitutionGroup="gml:Definition"/> 
 


 <complexType name="AbstractGeneralOperationParameterType" abstract="true"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:DefinitionType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:minimumOccurs" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Abstract definition of a parameter or group of parameters used by an operation method. 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


150  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


12.6.6.2 gml:minimumOccurs 


 <element name="minimumOccurs" type="nonNegativeInteger"/> 
 
The minimum number of times that values for this parameter group or parameter are required. If this attribute 
is omitted, the minimum number is one. 


12.6.6.3 gml:abstractGeneralOperationParameterRef 


 <element name="abstractGeneralOperationParameterRef" type="gml:AbstractGeneralOperationParameterRefType" 
 substitutionGroup="gml:dictionaryEntry"/> 
 


 <complexType name="AbstractGeneralOperationParameterRefType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:DictionaryEntryType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:_GeneralOperationParameter" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Association to an operation parameter or group, either referencing or containing the definition of that 
parameter or group. 


12.6.6.4 gml:OperationParameter 


 <element name="OperationParameter" type="gml:OperationParameterType" 
 substitutionGroup="gml:_GeneralOperationParameter"/> 
 


 <complexType name="OperationParameterType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:OperationParameterBaseType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:parameterID" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
 <complexType name="OperationParameterBaseType" abstract="true"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:AbstractGeneralOperationParameterType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:metaDataProperty" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:remarks" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:parameterName"/> 
     <element ref="gml:minimumOccurs" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute ref="gml:id" use="required"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
The definition of a parameter used by an operation method. Most parameter values are numeric, but other 
types of parameter values are possible. This complexType is expected to be used or extended for all 
operation methods, without defining operation-method-specialized element names. 


The OperationParameterBaseType provides the basic encoding for operation parameter objects, simplifying 
and restricting the DefinitionType as needed. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 151 
 


 


The parameterID elements contain a set of alternative identifications of this operation parameter. The first 
parameterID, if any, is normally the primary identification code, and any others are aliases. 


The "remarks" element contains comments on or information about this reference system, including source 
information. 


12.6.6.5 gml:parameterName 


 <element name="parameterName" type="gml:SimpleNameType" substitutionGroup="gml:name"/> 
 
The name by which this operation parameter is identified. 


12.6.6.6 gml:parameterID 


 <element name="parameterID" type="gml:IdentifierType"/> 
 
An identification of an operation parameter.  


12.6.6.7 gml:operationParameterRef 


 <element name="operationParameterRef" type="gml:OperationParameterRefType"/> 
 
 <complexType name="OperationParameterRefType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:AbstractGeneralOperationParameterRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:OperationParameter" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Association to an operation parameter, either referencing or containing the definition of that parameter. 


12.6.6.8 gml:OperationParameterGroup 


 <element name="OperationParameterGroup" type="gml:OperationParameterGroupType" 
 substitutionGroup="gml:_GeneralOperationParameter"/> 
 


 <complexType name="OperationParameterGroupType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:OperationParameterGroupBaseType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:groupID" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:maximumOccurs" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:includesParameter" minOccurs="2" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
 <complexType name="OperationParameterGroupBaseType" abstract="true"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:AbstractGeneralOperationParameterType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:metaDataProperty" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:remarks" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:groupName"/> 
     <element ref="gml:minimumOccurs" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute ref="gml:id" use="required"/> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


152  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
The definition of a group of parameters used by an operation method. This complexType is expected to be 
used or extended for all applicable operation methods, without defining operation-method-specialized element 
names. 


The OperationParameterGroupBaseType provides the basic encoding for operation parameter group objects, 
simplifying and restricting the DefinitionType as needed. 


The groupID" elements contain a set of alternative identifications of this operation parameter group. The first 
groupID, if any, is normally the primary identification code, and any others are aliases. 


The includesParameter elementsd are an unordered list of associations to the set of operation parameters 
that are members of this group. 


The "remarks" element contains comments on or information about this reference system, including source 
information. 


12.6.6.9 gml:groupName 


 <element name="groupName" type="gml:SimpleNameType" substitutionGroup="gml:name"/> 
 
The name by which this operation parameter group is identified. 


12.6.6.10 gml:groupID 


 <element name="groupID" type="gml:IdentifierType"/> 
 
An identification of an operation parameter group. 


12.6.6.11 gml:maximumOccurs 


 <element name="maximumOccurs" type="positiveInteger"/> 
 
The maximum number of times that values for this parameter group can be included. If this attribute is 
omitted, the maximum number is one. 


12.6.6.12 gml:includesParameter 


 <element name="includesParameter" type="gml:AbstractGeneralOperationParameterRefType"/> 
 
Association to an operation parameter that is a member of a group. 


12.6.6.13 gml:operationParameterGroupRef 


 <element name="operationParameterGroupRef" type="gml:OperationParameterRefType"/> 
 
 <complexType name="OperationParameterGroupRefType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:AbstractGeneralOperationParameterRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:OperationParameterGroup" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 153 
 


 


Association to an operation parameter, either referencing or containing the definition of that parameter. 


12.7 dataQuality schema 


12.7.1 Overview 


Information about the accuracy or precision of coordinates, or of coordinate operations and coordinate 
operation parameters, is quality information and should be reported where possible in conformance with ISO 
19115 and ISO 19114. 


The parameters that define a coordinate reference system are chosen rather than measured to satisfy the 
degrees-of-freedom problem in the changeover from observation to coordinate quantities. Coordinate 
reference systems are therefore by definition error-free (i.e., non-stochastic). A coordinate reference system is 
realised through a network of control points. The coordinates of those control points, derived from surface 
and/or from satellite observations, are stochastic. Their accuracy can be expressed in a covariance matrix, 
which, due to the degrees-of-freedom problem, will have a rank deficiency, described in geodetic literature. 


Coordinate transformations between coordinate reference systems usually have parameter values derived 
from two sets of point coordinates, one set in system 1, the other set in system 2. As these coordinates are 
stochastic (i.e., have random-error characteristics), the derived transformation parameter values will also be 
stochastic. Their covariance matrix can be calculated. 


Coordinates that have not been naturally determined in coordinate reference system 2, but have been 
determined in coordinate system 1 and then transformed to system 2, have the random error effects of the 
transformation superimposed on their original error characteristics. It may be possible in well-controlled cases 
to calculate the covariance matrices of the point coordinates before and after the transformation, and thus 
isolate the effect of the transformation, but in practice a user will only be interested in the accuracy of the final 
transformed coordinates. 


Nevertheless the option is offered to specify the covariance matrix of point coordinates resulting exclusively 
from the transformation. It is outside the scope of this document to describe how that covariance matrix should 
be used. Because a covariance matrix is symmetrical, only the upper or lower diagonal part (including the 
main diagonal) needs to be specified. 


For some transformations, this accuracy information is compacted in some assessment of an average impact 
on horizontal position and vertical position, allowing specification of average absolute accuracy and, when 
relevant and available, average relative accuracy. Hence separate quality measures may be specified for 
horizontal and for vertical position in those objects.   


The data quality schema, dataQuality.xsd, specifies how to XML encode positional data quality information to 
describe the positional accuracy of coordinate operations. This schema encodes the Data Quality (DQ) 
package of the UML Model for OGC Abstract Specification Topic 2: Spatial Referencing by Coordinates. That 
UML model is adapted from ISO 19111 - Spatial referencing by coordinates, as described in Annex B of Topic 
2. 


The dataQuality schema includes the units.xsd GML schema. This schema is identified by the following 
location-independent name (using URN syntax): 


urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-xsd:dataQuality:v3.1.0 
 


12.7.2 All elements 


12.7.2.1 gml:_positionalAccuracy 


 <element name="_positionalAccuracy" type="gml:AbstractPositionalAccuracyType" abstract="true"/> 
 
 <complexType name="AbstractPositionalAccuracyType" abstract="true"> 
  <sequence> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


154  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


   <element ref="gml:measureDescription" minOccurs="0"/> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 
Position error estimate (or accuracy) data. 


12.7.2.2 gml:measureDescription 


 <element name="measureDescription" type="gml:CodeType"/> 
 
A description of the position accuracy parameter(s) provided. 


12.7.2.3 gml:absoluteExternalPositionalAccuracy 


 <element name="absoluteExternalPositionalAccuracy" type="gml:AbsoluteExternalPositionalAccuracyType" 
 substitutionGroup="gml:_positionalAccuracy"/> 
 


 <complexType name="AbsoluteExternalPositionalAccuracyType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractPositionalAccuracyType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:result"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Closeness of reported coordinate values to values accepted as or being true. 


12.7.2.4 gml:relativeInternalPositionalAccuracy 


 <element name="relativeInternalPositionalAccuracy" type="gml:RelativeInternalPositionalAccuracyType" 
 substitutionGroup="gml:_positionalAccuracy"/> 
 


 <complexType name="RelativeInternalPositionalAccuracyType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractPositionalAccuracyType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:result"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Closeness of the relative positions of two or more positions to their respective relative positions accepted as 
or being true. 


12.7.2.5 gml:result 


 <element name="result" type="gml:MeasureType"/> 
 
A quantitative result defined by the evaluation procedure used, and identified by the measureDescription. 


12.7.2.6 gml:covarianceMatrix 


 <element name="covarianceMatrix" type="gml:CovarianceMatrixType" 
 substitutionGroup="gml:_positionalAccuracy"/> 
 


 <complexType name="CovarianceMatrixType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractPositionalAccuracyType"> 
    <sequence> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 155 
 


 


     <element ref="gml:unitOfMeasure" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:includesElement" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
Error estimate covariance matrix. 


The unitOfMeasure elements are an ordered sequence of units of measure, corresponding to the row and 
column index numbers of the covariance matrix, starting with row and column 1 and ending with row/column 
N. Each unit of measure is for the ordinate reflected in the relevant row and column of the covariance matrix. 


The includesElement elements are an unordered set of elements in this covariance matrix. Because the 
covariance matrix is symmetrical, only the elements in upper or lower diagonal part (including the main 
diagonal) of the matrix need to be specified. Any zero valued covariance elements can be omitted 


12.7.2.7 gml:includesElement 


 <element name="includesElement" type="gml:CovarianceElementType"/> 
 
 <complexType name="CovarianceElementType"> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:rowIndex"/> 
   <element ref="gml:columnIndex"/> 
   <element ref="gml:covariance"/> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 
An element of a covariance matrix. 


12.7.2.8 gml:rowIndex 


 <element name="rowIndex" type="positiveInteger"/> 
 
Row number of this covariance element value. 


12.7.2.9 gml:columnIndex 


 <element name="columnIndex" type="positiveInteger"/> 
 
Column number of this covariance element value. 


12.7.2.10 gml:covariance 


 <element name="covariance" type="double"/> 
 
Value of covariance matrix element. 


13 GML schemas  topology 


13.1 Introduction 


Topology is the branch of mathematics describing the properties of objects which are invariant under 
continuous deformation. For example, a circle is topologically equivalent to an ellipse because one can be 
transformed into the other by stretching. In geographic modelling, the foremost use of topology is in 
accelerating computational geometry. The constructs of topology allow characterisation of the spatial 
relationships between objects using simple combinatorial or algebraic algorithms. Topology, realised by the 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


156  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


appropriate geometry, also allows a compact and unambiguous mechanism for expressing shared geometry 
among geographic features. 


13.2 Topology Model  


The conceptual model underlying the representation of topology in GML is that of Topic 1 of the OGC Abstract 
Specification (ISO 19107). The model describes the correspondence of topological and geometric 
relationships up to 3 dimensions  volume topology. Relevant parts of the model are summarised here for 
convenience. 


There are four instantiable classes of primitive topology objects, one for each dimension up to 3D. In addition, 
topological complexes are supported, too.  


There is strong symmetry in the (topological boundary and coboundary) relationships between topology 
primitives of adjacent dimensions. Topology primitives are bounded by directed primitives of one lower 
dimension. The coboundary of each topology primitive is formed from directed topology primitives of one 
higher dimension. 


13.3 Types and elements 


13.3.1 Schema Includes 


 <include schemaLocation="geometryComplexes.xsd"/> 
 
The topology schema includes definitions from the geometry schema yielding the ability to describe primitives 
and complexes with a geometric realisation. 


13.3.2 gml:AbstractTopologyType, gml:_Topology 


  <complexType name="AbstractTopologyType" abstract="true"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <extension base="gml:AbstractGMLType"/> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
  <element name="_Topology" type="gml:AbstractTopologyType" abstract="true" substitutionGroup="gml:_Object"/> 
 
This abstract type supplies the root or base type for all topological elements including primitives and 
complexes. It inherits AbstractGMLType and hence can be identified using the gml:id attribute. 


13.3.3 gml:AbstractTopoPrimitive, gml:_TopoPrimtive 


  <complexType name="AbstractTopoPrimitiveType" abstract="true"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <extension base="gml:AbstractTopologyType"> 
        <sequence> 
          <element ref="gml:isolated" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
          <element ref="gml:container" minOccurs="0"/> 
        </sequence> 
      </extension> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
  <element name="_TopoPrimitive" type="gml:AbstractTopoPrimitiveType" abstract="true" 
   substitutionGroup="gml:_Topology"/> 
 
This abstract type acts as the base type for all topological primitive elements. Topology primitives are the 
atomic (smallest possible) units of a topology complex. Each topology primitive may contain references to 
other topology primitives of codimension 2 or more. So faces may isolate nodes and TopoSolids may isolate 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 157 
 


 


nodes and edges. Conversely, nodes may have faces as containers and nodes and edges may have 
TopoSolids as containers. 


13.3.4 gml:NodeType, gml:Node 


  <complexType name="NodeType"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <extension base="gml:AbstractTopoPrimitiveType"> 
        <sequence> 
          <element ref="gml:directedEdge" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
          <element ref="gml:pointProperty" minOccurs="0"/> 
        </sequence> 
      </extension> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
  <element name="Node" type="gml:NodeType" substitutionGroup="gml:_TopoPrimitive"/> 
 
The Node type and global element represent the 0-dimensional primitive expressing point coincidence. The 
topological boundary of a node is empty and hence requires no representation. The optional coboundary of a 
node is a set of directed edges which are incident on this node. 


NOTE In a 2D complex, this set may be ordered as a clockwise circular sequence.  In a 3D complex, the order of this 
set is arbitrary.   


Edges emanating from this node appear in the node coboundary with a negative orientation. 


A node may optionally be realised by a 0-dimensional (point) geometric primitive. 


13.3.5 gml:DirectedNodePropertyType, gml:directedNode 


  <complexType name="DirectedNodePropertyType"> 
    <choice> 
      <element ref="gml:Node" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </choice> 
    <attribute name="orientation" type="gml:SignType" default="+"/> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
  </complexType> 
 
  <element name="directedNode" type="gml:DirectedNodePropertyType"> 
    <annotation> 
      <appinfo> 
        <sch:pattern> 
          <sch:rule context="gml:directedNode"> 
            <sch:extends rule="hrefOrContent"/> 
          </sch:rule> 
        </sch:pattern> 
      </appinfo> 
    </annotation> 
  </element> 
 
The role of the DirectedNode type and element is in the boundary of topology edges and in the support of 
topological point features via the TopoPoint expression, see below. The orientation attribute of type 
gml:SignType expresses the sense in which the included node is used e.g. start (-) or end (+) node. 


13.3.6 gml:EdgeType, gml:Edge 


  <complexType name="EdgeType"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <extension base="gml:AbstractTopoPrimitiveType"> 
        <sequence> 
          <element ref="gml:directedNode" minOccurs="2" maxOccurs="2"/> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


158  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


          <element ref="gml:directedFace" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
          <element ref="gml:curveProperty" minOccurs="0"/> 
        </sequence> 
      </extension> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
  <element name="Edge" type="gml:EdgeType" substitutionGroup="gml:_TopoPrimitive"/> 
 
The Edge type and global element represent the 1-dimensional primitive expressing linear coincidence. The 
topological boundary of an Edge consists of a negatively directed start Node and a positively directed end 
Node.   The optional coboundary of an edge is a circular sequence of directed faces which are incident on this 
edge in document order. Faces which use a particular boundary edge in its positive orientation appear with 
positive orientation on the coboundary of the same edge. In the 2D case, the orientation of the face on the left 
of the edge is "+"; the orientation of the face on the right on its right is "-". An edge may optionally be realised 
by a 1-dimensional (curve) geometric primitive. 


13.3.7 gml:DirectedEdgePropertyType, gml:directedEdge 


  <complexType name="DirectedEdgePropertyType"> 
    <choice> 
      <element ref="gml:Edge" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </choice> 
    <attribute name="orientation" type="gml:SignType" default="+"/> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
  </complexType> 
 
  <element name="directedEdge" type="gml:DirectedEdgePropertyType"> 
    <annotation> 
      <appinfo> 
        <sch:pattern> 
          <sch:rule context="gml:directedEdge"> 
            <sch:extends rule="hrefOrContent"/> 
          </sch:rule> 
        </sch:pattern> 
      </appinfo> 
    </annotation> 
  </element> 
 
The role of the DirectedEdge type and element is in the boundary of topology faces, in the coBoundary of 
topology nodes and in the support of topological line features via the TopoCurve expression, see below. The 
orientation attribute of type gml:SignType expresses the sense in which the included edge is used e.g. forward 
or reverse. 


13.3.8 gml:FaceType, gml:Face 


  <complexType name="FaceType"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <extension base="gml:AbstractTopoPrimitiveType"> 
        <sequence> 
          <element ref="gml:directedEdge" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
          <element ref="gml:directedTopoSolid" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="2"/> 
          <element ref="gml:surfaceProperty" minOccurs="0"/> 
        </sequence> 
      </extension> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
  <element name="Face" type="gml:FaceType" substitutionGroup="gml:_TopoPrimitive"/> 
 
The Face type and global element represent the 2-dimensional topology primitive expressing surface overlap. 
The topological boundary of a face consists of a set of directed edges. Note that all edges associated with the 
face, including dangling edges, appear in the boundary.  A dangling edge has the same face on both sides.  
Consequently, a dangling edge has two different nodes in its boundary. A dangling edge may share zero, one 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 159 
 


 


or two bounding nodes with other edges in the boundary of a face. Two directedEdge elements with opposite 
orientations reference each dangling edge in the boundary of a face.  The non-dangling edges in the 
boundary of a face comprise one or more topological rings.   Each such ring consists of directedEdges 
connected in a cycle, and is oriented with the face on its left.  The optional coboundary of a face is a pair of 
directed solids which are bounded by this face. If present, there is precisely one positively directed and one 
negatively directed solid in the coboundary of every face. The positively directed solid corresponds to the solid 
which lies in the direction of the negatively directed normal to the face in any geometric realisation. A face 
may optionally be realised by a 2-dimensional (surface) geometric primitive. 


13.3.9 gml:DirectedFacePropertyType, gml:directedFace 


  <complexType name="DirectedFacePropertyType"> 
    <choice> 
      <element ref="gml:Face" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </choice> 
    <attribute name="orientation" type="gml:SignType" default="+"/> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
  </complexType> 
 
  <element name="directedFace" type="gml:DirectedFacePropertyType"> 
    <annotation> 
      <appinfo> 
        <sch:pattern> 
          <sch:rule context="gml:directedFace"> 
            <sch:extends rule="hrefOrContent"/> 
          </sch:rule> 
        </sch:pattern> 
      </appinfo> 
    </annotation> 
  </element> 
 
The role of the DirectedFace type and element is in the boundary of topology solids, in the coBoundary of 
topology edges and in the support of surface features via the TopoSurface expression, see below. The 
orientation attribute of type gml:SignType expresses the sense in which the included face is used e.g. inward 
or outward with respect to the surface normal in any geometric realisation. 


13.3.10 gml:TopoSolidType, gml:TopoSolid 


  <complexType name="TopoSolidType"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <extension base="gml:AbstractTopoPrimitiveType"> 
        <sequence> 
          <element ref="gml:directedFace" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:solidProperty" minOccurs="0"/> 
        </sequence> 
      </extension> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
  <element name="TopoSolid" type="gml:TopoSolidType" substitutionGroup="gml:_TopoPrimitive"/> 
 
The TopoSolid type and global element represent the 3-dimensional topology primitive expressing Volume 
interclause. The topological boundary of a TopoSolid consists of a set of directed faces. Note that all faces 
associated with the TopoSolid, including dangling faces, appear in the boundary.  A dangling face has the 
same solid on both sides.  Two directedFace elements with opposite orientations reference each dangling 
face in the boundary of a topological solid. The coboundary of a TopoSolid is empty and hence requires no 
representation.  A TopoSolid may optionally be realised by a 2-dimensional (solid) geometric primitive. 


13.3.11 gml:DirectedTopoSolidPropertyType, gml:directedTopoSolid 


  <complexType name="DirectedTopoSolidPropertyType"> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


160  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


    <choice> 
      <element ref="gml:TopoSolid"/> 
    </choice> 
    <attribute name="orientation" type="gml:SignType" default="+"/> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
  </complexType> 
 
  <element name="directedTopoSolid" type="gml:DirectedTopoSolidPropertyType"> 
    <annotation> 
      <appinfo> 
        <sch:pattern> 
          <sch:rule context="gml:directedTopoSolid"> 
            <sch:extends rule="hrefOrContent"/> 
          </sch:rule> 
        </sch:pattern> 
      </appinfo> 
    </annotation> 
  </element> 
 
The role of the DirectedSolid type and element is in the coBoundary of topology faces and in the support of 3D 
volume features via the TopoVolume expression, see below. The orientation attribute of type gml:SignType 
expresses the sense in which the included solid appears in the face coboundary.  Note that in the context of a 
TopoVolume the orientation attribute has no meaning in 3D. 


13.3.12 gml:isolated 


  <element name="isolated" type="gml:IsolatedPropertyType"> 
    <annotation> 
      <appinfo> 
        <sch:pattern> 
          <sch:rule context="gml:isolated"> 
            <sch:extends rule="hrefOrContent"/> 
          </sch:rule> 
        </sch:pattern> 
      </appinfo> 
    </annotation> 
  </element> 
 
  <complexType name="IsolatedPropertyType"> 
    <choice minOccurs="0"> 
      <element ref="gml:Node"/> 
      <element ref="gml:Edge"/> 
    </choice> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
  </complexType> 
 
All of the adjacency relationships between topology primitives whose dimensions differ by +/- 1 are described 
using boundary and coboundary through directed topology primitive properties as described for each primitive. 
This includes instances where a dangling edge has the same face on both sides or a dangling face has the 
same solid on both sides. These primitives will appear twice in the boundary of the relevant face or solid with 
alternate sign. Primitives which are enclosed by another primitive of at least codimension 2 however, with no 
intermediate dimension primitive, are truly isolated. For faces this corresponds to nodes with no relationship to 
a bounding edge of the face. For solids, it corresponds to nodes or edges which are not referred to by the 
boundary faces of the solid. 


Note a node may be isolated in a face and yet appear in the boundary of an edge which does not form part of 
the boundary of the face. In 3D this corresponds geometrically to a curve whose endpoint meets the interior of 
a surface. 


13.3.13 gml:container 


  <element name="container" type="gml:ContainerPropertyType"> 
    <annotation> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 161 
 


 


      <appinfo> 
        <sch:pattern> 
          <sch:rule context="gml:containerProperty"> 
            <sch:extends rule="hrefOrContent"/> 
          </sch:rule> 
        </sch:pattern> 
      </appinfo> 
    </annotation> 
  </element> 
 
  <complexType name="ContainerPropertyType"> 
    <choice minOccurs="0"> 
      <element ref="gml:Face"/> 
      <element ref="gml:TopoSolid"/> 
    </choice> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
  </complexType> 
 
The container type and element optionally contain the reciprocal relationships for the isolated property 
described above. 


13.3.14 gml:TopoPointType, gmlTopoPoint 


 <complexType name="TopoPointType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractTopologyType"> 
   <sequence> 
    <element ref="gml:directedNode"/> 


  </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent>    
 </complexType> 
 
 <element name="TopoPoint" type="gml:TopoPointType"/> 
 
The intended use of TopoPoint is to appear within a point feature to express the structural and possibly 
geometric relationships of this point to other features via shared node definitions. Note the orientation 
assigned to the directedNode has no meaning in this context. It is preserved for symmetry with the types and 
elements which follow. 


13.3.15 gml:TopoPointPropertyType, gml:topoPointProperty 


 <complexType name="TopoPointPropertyType"> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:TopoPoint"/> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 
 <element name="topoPointProperty" type="gml:TopoPointPropertyType"/> 
 
The topoPointProperty element  can be used as a property of features to express their relationship to the 
referenced topology node. 


13.3.16 gml:TopoCurveType, gml:TopoCurve 


 <complexType name="TopoCurveType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractTopologyType"> 


  <sequence> 
    <element ref="gml:directedEdge" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
   </sequence> 
   </extension> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


162  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


  </complexContent>    
 </complexType> 
 
 <element name="TopoCurve" type="gml:TopoCurveType"/> 
 
The TopoCurve type and element represent a homogeneous topological expression, a list of directed edges, 
which if realised are isomorphic to a geometric curve primitive. The intended use of TopoCurve is to appear 
within a line feature instance to express the structural and geometric relationships of this line to other features 
via the shared edge definitions. 


13.3.17 gml:TopoCurvePropertyType, gml:topoCurveProperty 


 <complexType name="TopoCurvePropertyType"> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:TopoCurve"/> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 
 <element name="topoCurveProperty" type="gml:TopoCurvePropertyType"/> 
 
The topoCurveProperty element  can be used as a property of features to express their relationship to the 
referenced topology edges. 


13.3.18 gml:TopoSurfaceType, gml:TopoSurface 


 <complexType name="TopoSurfaceType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractTopologyType"> 


  <sequence> 
    <element ref="gml:directedFace" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
   </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent>    
 </complexType> 
 
 <element name="TopoSurface" type="gml:TopoSurfaceType"/> 
 
The TopoSurface type and element represent a homogeneous topological expression, a set of directed faces, 
which if realised are isomorphic to a geometric surface primitive. The intended use of TopoSurface is to 
appear within a surface feature instance to express the structural and possibly geometric relationships of this 
surface to other features via the shared face definitions. 


13.3.19 gml:TopoSurfacePropertyType, gml:topoSurfaceProperty 


 <complexType name="TopoSurfacePropertyType"> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:TopoSurface"/> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 
 <element name="topoSurfaceProperty" type="gml:TopoSurfacePropertyType"/> 
 
The topoSurfaceProperty element  can be used as a property of features to express their relationship to the 
referenced topology faces. 


13.3.20 gml:TopoVolumeType, gml:TopoVolume 


 <complexType name="TopoVolumeType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractTopologyType"> 


  <sequence> 
    <element ref="gml:directedTopoSolid" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 163 
 


 


   </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent>    
 </complexType> 
 
 <element name="TopoVolume" type="gml:TopoVolumeType"/> 
 
The TopoVolume type and element represent a homogeneous topological expression, a set of directed 
TopoSolids, which if realised are isomorphic to a geometric solid primitive. The intended use of TopoVolume 
is to appear within a 3D solid feature instance to express the structural and geometric relationships of this 
solid to other features via the shared TopoSolid definitions. Note the orientation assigned to the directedSolid 
has no meaning in three dimensions. It is preserved for symmetry with the preceding types and elements. 


13.3.21 gml:TopoVolumePropertyType, gml:topoVolumeProperty 


 <complexType name="TopoVolumePropertyType"> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:TopoVolume"/> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 
 <element name="topoVolumeProperty" type="gml:TopoVolumePropertyType"/> 
 
The topoVolumeProperty element  can be used as a property of features to express their relationship to the 
referenced topology Volume. 


13.3.22 gml:TopoComplexType, gml:TopoComplex 


A TopoComplex in GML is a collection of disconnected TopoPrimitives. If a topological primitive (other than a 
Node) is in a particular TopoComplex, then there exists a set of primitives of lower dimension in the same 
complex that form the boundary of this primitive. 


  <complexType name="TopoComplexType"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <extension base="gml:AbstractTopologyType"> 
        <sequence> 
          <element ref="gml:maximalComplex"/> 
          <element ref="gml:superComplex" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
          <element ref="gml:subComplex" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
          <element ref="gml:topoPrimitiveMember" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
          <element ref="gml:topoPrimitiveMembers" minOccurs="0"/> 
        </sequence> 
        <attribute name="isMaximal" type="boolean" default="false"/> 
      </extension> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
  <element name="TopoComplex" type="gml:TopoComplexType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Topology"/> 
 
This type and element provide encoding for a topology complex comprising multiple topology primitive 
members.  In addition to primitives, each complex holds a reference to a unique maximal complex (the 
complex which has no supercomplex) and optionally to some number of sub- or super- complexes. A topology 
complex contains its primitive and sub-complex members, and is contained by its super-complex(es).  The 
primitive and sub-complex members of a topological complex have dimensionality less than or equal to the 
dimensionality of the topology complex.  There is one and only one maximal complex per topological manifold.   


13.3.23 Maximal, sub- and super-complexes 


  <complexType name="TopoComplexMemberType"> 
    <sequence> 
      <element ref="gml:TopoComplex" minOccurs="0"/> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


164  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
  </complexType> 
 
  <element name="subComplex" type="gml:TopoComplexMemberType"> 
    <annotation> 
      <appinfo> 
        <sch:pattern> 
          <sch:rule context="gml:subComplex"> 
            <sch:extends rule="hrefOrContent"/> 
          </sch:rule> 
        </sch:pattern> 
      </appinfo> 
    </annotation> 
  </element> 
 
  <element name="superComplex" type="gml:TopoComplexMemberType"> 
    <annotation> 
      <appinfo> 
        <sch:pattern> 
          <sch:rule context="gml:superComplex"> 
            <sch:extends rule="hrefOrContent"/> 
          </sch:rule> 
        </sch:pattern> 
      </appinfo> 
    </annotation> 
  </element> 
 
  <element name="maximalComplex" type="gml:TopoComplexMemberType"> 
    <annotation> 
      <appinfo> 
        <sch:pattern> 
          <sch:rule context="gml:subComplex"> 
            <sch:extends rule="hrefOrContent"/> 
          </sch:rule> 
        </sch:pattern> 
      </appinfo> 
      <documentation>Need schamatron test here that isMaximal attribute value is true</documentation> 
    </annotation> 
  </element> 
 
These elements and type provide encoding for relationships between topology complexes as described for the 
TopoComplexType. 


13.3.24 gml:topoPrimitiveMember 


  <element name="topoPrimitiveMember" type="gml:topoPrimitiveMemberType"> 
    <annotation> 
      <appinfo> 
        <sch:pattern> 
          <sch:rule context="gml:topoPrimitiveMember"> 
            <sch:extends rule="hrefOrContent"/> 
          </sch:rule> 
        </sch:pattern> 
      </appinfo> 
    </annotation> 
  </element> 
 
  <complexType name="topoPrimitiveMemberType"> 
    <sequence> 
      <element ref="gml:_TopoPrimitive" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
  </complexType> 
 
This type and element encode the relationship between a topology complex and a single topology primitive. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 165 
 


 


13.3.25 gml:topoPrimitiveMembers 


  <element name="topoPrimitiveMembers" type="gml:TopoPrimitiveArrayAssociationType"> 
    <annotation> 
      <appinfo> 
        <sch:pattern> 
          <sch:rule context="gml:topoPrimitiveMember"> 
            <sch:extends rule="hrefOrContent"/> 
          </sch:rule> 
        </sch:pattern> 
      </appinfo> 
    </annotation> 
  </element> 
 
  <complexType name="TopoPrimitiveArrayAssociationType"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <restriction base="gml:ArrayAssociationType"> 
        <sequence> 
          <element ref="gml:_TopoPrimitive" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
        </sequence> 
      </restriction> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
This type and element encode the relationship between a topology complex and an arbitrary number of 
topology primitives. Note that because of the array style of encoding this type requires that the encodings for 
the topology primitives be in-line rather than remote properties. 


13.3.26 gml:TopoComplexProperty, gml:topoComplexProperty 


  <complexType name="TopoComplexMemberType"> 
    <sequence> 
      <element ref="gml:TopoComplex" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
  </complexType> 
 
  <element name="topoComplexProperty" type="gml:TopoComplexMemberType"/> 
 
This type and element encode the relationship between a GML object such as a feature collection and a 
topological complex.  They allow a feature collection to contain or reference a topological complex that 
contains topologies referenced by members of the feature collection.   


14 GML schemas  temporal information and dynamic features 


14.1 Overview 


The GML temporal schemas include components for describing temporal geometry and topology, temporal 
reference systems, and the temporal characteristics of geographic data. The model underlying the 
representation constitutes a profile of the conceptual schema described in ISO 19108:2002 [i]. The underlying 
spatiotemporal model strives to accommodate both feature-level and attribute-level time stamping; basic 
support for tracking moving objects is also included.  


Time is measured on two types of scales: interval and ordinal.  An interval scale offers a basis for measuring 
duration; an ordinal scale provides information only about relative position in time (e.g. a stratigraphic 
sequence or the geological time scale).  







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


166  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


Two other ISO standards are relevant to describing temporal objects:  ISO 8601 describes encodings for time 
instants and time periods, as text strings with particular structure and punctuation; ISO 11404 provides a 
detailed description of time intervals as part of a general discussion of language independent datatypes.   


The temporal schemas cover two interrelated topics: three schema documents provide basic elements for 
representing temporal instants and periods, temporal topology, and reference systems; a more specialized 
schema document defines components used for dynamic features. Instances of temporal geometric types are 
used as values for the temporal properties of geographic features. All schemas are listed in Annex C.  


14.2 Temporal schema 


14.2.1 Overview 


The basic temporal types and elements are described in the schema listed in Annex C. The main temporal 
schema is identified by the following location-independent name (using URN syntax): 


14.2.2 urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-xsd:temporal:v3.1.0Temporal objects and properties 


A hierarchy of elements is provided that matches the conceptual schema described in ISO 19108:2002. This 
includes a number of abstract (non-instantiable) elements at the top of the hierarchy.   


14.2.2.1 gml:_TimeObject 


The abstract element gml:_TimeObject acts as the head of a substitution group for temporal primitives and 
complexes.  It is declared in the schema as follows: 


  <element name="_TimeObject" type="gml:AbstractTimeObjectType" abstract="true" substitutionGroup="gml:_GML"/> 
 
A gml:_TimeObject may be used in any position that a gml:_ GML is valid.  Its content model is defined as 
follows: 


  <complexType name="AbstractTimeObjectType" abstract="true"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <extension base="gml:AbstractGMLType"/> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
NOTE The content model of gml:_TimeObject is a vacuous extension of AbstractGMLType.  Types derived from this 
have the standard GML object properties available: metaDataProperty, description, name.   


14.2.2.2 gml:_TimePrimitive 


The abstract element TimePrimitive acts as the head of a substitution group for geometric and topological 
temporal primitives.  It is declared in the schema as follows: 


  <element name="_TimePrimitive" type="gml:AbstractTimePrimitiveType" abstract="true" 
substitutionGroup="gml:_TimeObject"/> 
 
A gml:_TimePrimitive may be used in any position that a gml:_ TimeObject is valid.  Its content model is 
defined as follows: 


  <complexType name="AbstractTimePrimitiveType" abstract="true"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <extension base="gml:AbstractTimeObjectType"> 
        <sequence> 
          <element name="relatedTime" type="gml:RelatedTimeType" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
        </sequence> 
      </extension> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 167 
 


 


This extends the model for generic temporal objects with properties indicating relationships between this 
temporal primitive and other temporal primitives. The definition of gml:RelatedTimeType is provided in 
subclause 14.2.2.4 below.   


14.2.2.3 gml:TimePrimitivePropertyType, gml:validTime 


gml:TimePrimitivePropertyType provides a standard content model for associations between an arbitrary 
member of the substitution group whose head is gml:_TimePrimitive and another object: 


 
  <complexType name="TimePrimitivePropertyType"> 
    <sequence minOccurs="0"> 
        <element ref="gml:_TimePrimitive"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
  </complexType> 
  
gml:validTime is a convenience element declared as follows:   


  <element name="validTime" type="gml:TimePrimitivePropertyType"/> 
 


14.2.2.4 gml:RelatedTimeType 


gml:RelatedTimeType provides a content model for indicating the relative position of an arbitrary member of 
the substitution group whose head is gml:_TimePrimitive.  It extends the generic 
gml:TimePrimitivePropertyType with an XML attribute relativePosition, whose value is selected from the set 
of 13 temporal relationships identified by Allen (1983) [ISO 19108:2002]: 
 
  <complexType name="RelatedTimeType"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <extension base="gml:TimePrimitivePropertyType"> 
        <attribute name="relativePosition"> 
          <simpleType> 
            <restriction base="string"> 
              <enumeration value="Before"/> 
              <enumeration value="After"/> 
              <enumeration value="Begins"/> 
              <enumeration value="Ends"/> 
              <enumeration value="During"/> 
              <enumeration value="Equals"/> 
              <enumeration value="Contains"/> 
              <enumeration value="Overlaps"/> 
              <enumeration value="Meets"/> 
              <enumeration value="OverlappedBy"/> 
              <enumeration value="MetBy"/> 
              <enumeration value="BegunBy"/> 
              <enumeration value="EndedBy"/> 
            </restriction> 
          </simpleType> 
        </attribute> 
      </extension> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 


14.2.2.5 gml:_TimeComplex 


A temporal complex shall be an aggregation of temporal primitives, represents a temporal geometric complex 
and a temporal topology complex.  Temporal geometric complex is not defined in this clause.  This standard 
does not distinguish a temporal linear graph from a temporal non-linear graph.  







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


168  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


The abstract element TimeComplex acts as the head of a substitution group for temporal complexes.  It is 
declared in the schema as follows: 


  <element name="_TimeComplex" type="gml:AbstractTimeComplexType" abstract="true" 
substitutionGroup="gml:_TimeObject"/> 
 
A gml:_TimeComplex may be used in any position that a gml:_ TimeObject is valid.  Its content model is 
defined as follows: 


  <complexType name="AbstractTimeComplexType" abstract="true"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <extension base="gml:AbstractTimeObjectType"/> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 


14.2.3 Temporal geometry 


Temporal geometry is described in terms of time instants, periods, positions and lengths.   


14.2.3.1 gml:_TimeGeometricPrimitive 


The abstract element TimeGeometricPrimitive acts as the head of a substitution group for geometric temporal 
primitives.  It is declared in the schema as follows: 


  <element name="_TimeGeometricPrimitive" type="gml:AbstractTimeGeometricPrimitiveType" abstract="true" 
substitutionGroup="gml:_TimePrimitive"/> 
 
A gml:_TimeGeometricPrimitive may be used in any position that a gml:_ TimePrimitive is valid.  Its content 
model is defined as follows: 


  <complexType name="AbstractTimeGeometricPrimitiveType" abstract="true"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <extension base="gml:AbstractTimePrimitiveType"> 
        <attribute name="frame" type="anyURI" use="optional" default="#ISO-8601"/> 
      </extension> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 


A temporal geometry shall be associated with a temporal reference system through the frame attribute that 
provides a URI reference that identifies a description of the reference system.  Following ISO 8601, the 
Gregorian calendar with UTC is the default reference system, but others may also be used.  The GPS 
calendar and the Julian calendar are alternative reference systems in common use. 


The two geometric primitives in the temporal dimension are the instant and the period. GML components are 
defined to support these as follows.   


14.2.3.2 gml:TimeInstant 


An instant is a zero-dimensional geometric primitive that represents an identifiable position in time (it is 
equivalent to a point in space). In practice, an instant is an interval whose duration is less than a chrononthe 
resolution of the time scale.. 


The element gml:TimeInstant is declared as follows: 


  <element name="TimeInstant" type="gml:TimeInstantType" substitutionGroup="gml:_TimeGeometricPrimitive"/> 
 
A gml:TimeInstant may be used in any position that a gml:_ TimeGeometricPrimitive is valid.  Its content 
model is defined as follows: 


  <complexType name="TimeInstantType" final="#all"> 
    <complexContent> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 169 
 


 


      <extension base="gml: AbstractTimeGeometricPrimitiveType "> 
        <sequence> 
          <element ref="gml:timePosition"/> 
        </sequence> 
      </extension> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
In an instance document, a gml:TimeInstant contains a gml:timePosition as follows: 


  <gml:TimeInstant gml:id="t11"> 
    <gml:description>Abby's birthday</gml:description> 
    <gml:timePosition>2001-05-23</gml:timePosition> 
  </gml:TimeInstant> 
 


14.2.3.3 gml:TimeInstantPropertyType 


gml:TimeInstantPropertyType is a specialisation of gml:TimePrimitivePropertyType that provides for 
associating a gml:TimeInstant with an object: 


  <complexType name="TimeInstantPropertyType"> 
    <sequence minOccurs="0"> 
      <element ref="gml:TimeInstant"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
  </complexType> 
 


14.2.3.4 gml:TimePeriod 


A period is a one-dimensional geometric primitive that represents an identifiable extent in time (it is equivalent 
to a curve or envelope in space).  It is an open interval bounded by beginning and end points (i.e. instants), 
and has length (i.e. duration).  Its location in time is described by the temporal positions of the instants at 
which it begins and ends. The length of the period is equal to the temporal distance between the two bounding 
temporal positions.   


The element gml:TimePeriod is declared as follows: 


  <element name="TimePeriod" type="gml:TimePeriodType" substitutionGroup="gml:_TimeGeometricPrimitive"/> 
 
gml:TimePeriod may be used in any position that a gml:_ TimeGeometricPrimitive is valid.  Its content model 
is defined as follows: 


  <complexType name="TimePeriodType"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <extension base="gml:AbstractTimeGeometricPrimitiveType"> 
        <sequence> 
          <choice> 
            <element name="beginPosition" type="gml:TimePositionType"/> 
            <element name="begin" type="gml:TimeInstantPropertyType"/> 
          </choice> 
          <choice> 
            <element name="endPosition" type="gml:TimePositionType"/> 
            <element name="end" type="gml:TimeInstantPropertyType"/> 
          </choice> 
          <element ref="gml:_ timeLength" minOccurs="0"/> 
        </sequence> 
      </extension> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


170  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


Both beginning and end may be described in terms of their direct position using gml:TimePositionType (clause 
0) which is an XML Schema simpleContent type, or by reference to an indentifiable time instant using 
gml:TimeInstantPropertyType (clause 14.2.3.3).   


For example, within a gml:TimePeriod, a gml:TimeInstant may appear directly as the value of the begin and 
end as follows: 


  <gml:TimePeriod gml:id="p22"> 
    <gml:begin> 
      <gml:TimeInstant gml:id="t11"> 
        <gml:timePosition>2001-05-23</gml:timePosition> 
      </gml:TimeInstant> 
    </gml:begin> 
    <gml:end> 
      <gml:TimeInstant gml:id="t12"> 
        <gml:timePosition>2001-06-23</gml:timePosition> 
      </gml:TimeInstant> 
    </gml:end> 
  </gml:TimePeriod> 
 
Alternatively a limit of a gml:timePeriod may use the conventional GML property model to make a reference to 
a time instant described elsewhere, or a limit may be indicated as a direct position.  The following mixed 
example shows both of these, as well as including the optional gml:duration property:  


  <gml:TimePeriod gml:id="p22"> 
    <gml:begin xlink:href="#t11"/> 
    <gml:endPosition>2002-05-23</gml:endPosition> 
    <gml:duration>P1Y</gml:duration> 
  </gml:TimePeriod> 
 


14.2.3.5 gml:timePeriodPropertyType 


gml:timePeriodPropertyType is a specialisation of gml:TimePrimitivePropertyType that provides for 
associating a gml:TimePeriod with an object:   


  <complexType name="TimePeriodPropertyType"> 
    <sequence minOccurs="0"> 
      <element ref="gml:TimePeriod"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
  </complexType> 
 


14.2.3.6 gml:TimePositionType, gml:timePosition 


The method for identifying a temporal position is specific to each temporal reference system.  
gml:timePositionType supports the description of temporal position according to the subtypes described in 
ISO 19108:2002.  Values based on calendars and clocks use lexical formats that are based on the ISO 8601 
standard, as described in Part 2 of the XML Schema recommendation. A decimal value may be used with 
coordinate systems such as GPS time or UNIX time. A URI may be used to provide a reference to some era in 
an ordinal reference system (e.g. a geological epoch).  


In common with many of the components using the stereotype <<DataType>> in the ISO 19100 
specifications, the corresponding GML component has simpleContent.  However, the content model 
gml:TimePositionType is defined in several steps:   


  <complexType name="TimePositionType" final="#all"> 
    <simpleContent> 
      <extension base="gml:TimePositionUnion"> 
        <attribute name="frame" type="anyURI" use="optional" default="#ISO-8601"/> 
        <attribute name="calendarEraName" type="string" use="optional"/> 
        <attribute name="indeterminatePosition" type="gml:TimeIndeterminateValueType" use="optional"/> 
      </extension> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 171 
 


 


    </simpleContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
Three XML attributes appear on gml:TimePositionType: 


A time value shall be associated with a temporal reference system through the frame attribute that provides a 
URI reference that identifies a description of the reference system.  Following ISO 8601, the Gregorian 
calendar with UTC is the default reference system, but others may also be used.  The GPS calendar and the 
Julian calendar are alternative reference systems in common use.  Components for describing temporal 
reference systems are described in clause 14.3, but it is not required that the reference system be described 
in this, as the reference can refer to anything that may be indentified with a URI.   


For time values using a calendar containing more than one era, the (optional) calendarEraName attribute 
provides the name of the calendar era.   


Inexact temporal positions may be expressed using the optional indeterminatePosition attribute.  This takes 
a value from an enumeration defined as follows: 


  <simpleType name="TimeIndeterminateValueType"> 
    <restriction base="string"> 
      <enumeration value="after"/> 
      <enumeration value="before"/> 
      <enumeration value="now"/> 
      <enumeration value="unknown"/> 
    </restriction> 
  </simpleType> 
 
These values are interpreted as follows:  


 unknown indicates that no specific value for temporal position is provided. 


 now indicates that the specified value shall be replaced with the current temporal position whenever 
the value is accessed. 


 before indicates that the actual temporal position is unknown, but it is known to be before the 
specified value. 


 after indicates that the actual temporal position is unknown, but it is known to be after the specified 
value. 


A value for indeterminatePosition can be used either  


 alone, or  


 can qualify a specific value for temporal position (e.g. before 2002-12, after 1019624400).  


The simpleType gml:TimePositionUnion is a union of XML Schema simple types which instantiate the 
subtypes for temporal position described in ISO 19108.   
 
<simpleType name="TimePositionUnion"> 
    <union memberTypes="gml:CalDate time dateTime anyURI decimal"/> 
  </simpleType> 
 
An ordinal era may be referenced via URI.  A decimal value can be used to indicate the distance from the 
scale origin (e.g. UNIX time, GPS calendar).  time is used for a position that recurs daily (see clause 5.4.4.2 
of ISO 19108:2002).   


Finally, calendar and clock forms that support the representation of time in systems based on years, months, 
days, hours, minutes and seconds, in a notation following ISO 8601, are assembled as follows: 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


172  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


  <simpleType name="CalDate"> 
    <union memberTypes="date gYearMonth gYear"/> 
  </simpleType> 
 


NOTE The XML Schema simepleType dateTime does not permit right-truncation, except for fractions of seconds, 
which is why date, gYear and gYearMonth are required.   


NOTE Following ISO 19108:2002, when used with non-Gregorian calendars based on years, months, days, the 
same lexical representation should still be used.  Following XML Schema part 2, leading zeros should be added if the year 
value would otherwise have fewer than four digits.   


The element gml:timePosition is declared as follows: 


  <element name="timePosition" type="gml:TimePositionType"/> 
 
This element is used directly as a property of gml:TimeInstant (see clause 14.2.3.2), and may also be used in 
application schemas.  The following examples illustrate how gml:timePosition or other elements of this type 
may appear in a data instance: 


<gml:timePosition>2002-11-25T13:20:20</gml:timePosition> 
 
<gml:timePosition indeterminatePosition="after">1994</gml:timePosition> 
 
<gml:timePosition indeterminatePosition="now"></gml:timePosition> 
 
<gml:timePosition frame=http://my.big.org/TRS/GPS>25876321.01</gml:timePosition> 
 
<gml:timePosition frame="http://my.big.org/TRS/archaeology"> http://my.history.org/eras/bronzeAge </gml:timePosition> 
 
<gml:timePosition frame=http://my.big.org/TRS/calendars/japanese calendarEraName="Meiji">0085-
03</gml:timePosition> 
 


14.2.3.7 gml:TimeLengthType, gml:_timeLength, gml:duration, gml:timeInterval, gml:TimeUnitType 


The length of a time period is described using the element gml:_timeLength, which is declared in the schema 
as follows: 


  <element name="_timeLength" type="gml:TimeDurationType" abstract="true"> 
 
gml:_timeLength is an abstract element, which acts as the head of a substitution group.  Its content model is a 
union of the XML Schema duration and decimal simpleTypes, defined as follows: 


  <simpleType name="TimeLengthType"> 
    <union memberTypes="duration decimal"/> 
  </simpleType> 
 
One member of the substitution group is gml:duration, which conforms to the ISO 8601 syntax for temporal 
length as implemented by the XML Schema duration type: 


  <element name="duration" type="duration" substitutionGroup="gml:_timeLength "/> 
 
Another member of the substitution group is gml:timeInterval which conforms to the ISO 11404 standard 
which is based on floating point values for temporal length.   


  <element name="timeInterval" type="gml:TimeIntervalLengthType" substitutionGroup="gml:_timeLength "/> 
 
  <complexType name="TimeIntervalLengthType" final="#all"> 
    <simpleContent> 
      <extension base="decimal"> 
        <attribute name="unit" type="gml:TimeUnitType" use="required"/> 
        <attribute name="radix" type="positiveInteger" use="optional"/> 
        <attribute name="factor" type="integer" use="optional"/> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 173 
 


 


      </extension> 
    </simpleContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
ISO 11404 syntax specifies the use of a positiveInteger together with appropriate values for radix and factor. 
The resolution of the time interval is to one radix ^(-factor) of the specified time unit (e.g. unit="second", 
radix="10", factor="3" specifices a resolution of milliseconds).   


The value of the unit is either selected from the units for time intervals from ISO 31-1:1992, or is another 
suitable unit.  The encoding is defined for GML in gml:TimeUnitType: 


  <simpleType name="TimeUnitType"> 
    <union> 
      <simpleType> 
        <restriction base="string"> 
          <enumeration value="year"/> 
          <enumeration value="month"/> 
          <enumeration value="day"/> 
          <enumeration value="hour"/> 
          <enumeration value="minute"/> 
          <enumeration value="second"/> 
        </restriction> 
      </simpleType> 
      <simpleType> 
        <restriction base="string"> 
          <pattern value="other:\w{2,}"/> 
        </restriction> 
      </simpleType> 
    </union> 
  </simpleType> 
 
The second component of this union type provides a method for indicating time units other than the six 
standard units given in the enumeration.   


For example, to express a period length of 5 days, 14 hours, and 30 minutes any of the following instances 
are acceptable: 


<duration>P5DT14H30M</duration> 
<timeInterval unit=hour radix=10 factor=0>134.5</timeInterval> 
<timeInterval unit=other:week radix=10 factor=0> 0.800595</timeInterval> 
 


14.3 Temporal topology schema 


Temporal topology is described in terms of time complexes, nodes, and edges, and the connectivity between 
these.  The temporal context of features that does not relate directly to position in time is described using 
connectivity relationships among instants and periods. These may incidentally provide information about the 
ordering of objects in time. Temporal topology does not directly provide information about temporal position. It 
is used in the case of describing a lineage or a history (ex. a family tree expressing evolution of species, an 
ecological cycle, a lineage of lands or buildings, or a history of separation and merger of administrative 
boundaries). This clause specifies the temporal topology as temporal characteristics of features in compliance 
with ISO 19108  Temporal Schema. 


14.3.1 Overview 


The temporal topology types and elements are described in the schema listed in Annex C. The temporal 
topology schema is identified by the following location-independent name (using URN syntax): 


urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-xsd:temporalTopology:v3.1.0 
 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


174  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


14.3.2 Temporal topology objects 


A temporal topology object shall be a temporal element that describes the order of features or feature 
properties as temporal characteristics of features.  The two temporal topology objects are primitive and 
complex.  Annex C defines the schema for temporal topology objects.   


As time is one dimensional topological space, temporal topology primitives shall be a time node corresponding 
to an instant, and a time edge corresponding to a period.  A time node is an abstraction of an event that 
happened at a certain instant as a start or an end of more than one states. A state is a condition  a 
characteristic of a feature or data set that persists for a period. A static feature in this standard means a 
feature that holds the consistent identifier during its life span. Time edge is an abstraction of a state, and 
associates with time nodes representing its start and end.  However, temporal topology primitives do not 
directly indicate when or how long. Time node may not be a start or an end of a time edge in the case of 
describing the event not associating with states. Such a node is called as an isolated node. 


Topological complex is a collection of topological primitives that is closed under the boundary operation.  A 
temporal topological complex shall be a connected acyclic directed graph composed of time edges and time 
nodes. A minimum temporal topological complex is a time edge with two time nodes at its both ends.  


Example A lifecycle of a building can be described as a sequence of stages: plan, designing, construction, 
utilization, disposal and demolition.  Each stage can be represented as a time edge.  The boundary of each stage 
describing as a time node represents an event of decision-making, which terminates the stage and also originates the 
next stage. Thus, a lifecycle of a building is described as a temporal topology complex composed of a sequence of 
time edges connected with time nodes.   


14.3.2.1 gml:_TimeTopologyPrimitive 


Temporal topology primitives shall imply the ordering information between features or feature properties. The 
temporal connection of features can be examined, if they have temporal topology primitives as values of their 
properties. Usually, an instantaneous feature associates with a time node, and a static feature associates with 
a time edge.  A feature with both modes associates with the temporal topology primitive: a supertype of time 
nodes and time edges.   


The abstract element TimeTopologyPrimitive acts as the head of a substitution group for topological temporal 
primitives.  It is defined in the schema as follows: 


  <element name="_TimeTopologyPrimitive" type="gml:AbstractTimeTopologyPrimitiveType" abstract="true" 
substitutionGroup="gml:_TimePrimitive"/> 
 
gml:_TimeTopologyPrimitive may be used in any position that a gml:_ TimePrimitive is valid.  Its content 
model is defined as follows: 


  <complexType name="AbstractTimeTopologyPrimitiveType" abstract="true"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <extension base="gml:AbstractTimePrimitiveType"> 
        <sequence> 
          <element name="complex" type="gml:ReferenceType" minOccurs="0"/> 
        </sequence> 
      </extension> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
A topological primitive is always connected to one or more other topological primitives, and is, therefore, 
always a member of a topological complex. In a GML instance, this will often be indicated by the primitives 
being described by elements that are descendents of an element describing a complex. However, in order to 
support the case where a temporal topological primitive is described in another context, the optional complex 
property is provided, which carries a reference to the parent temporal topological complex.   
 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 175 
 


 


14.3.2.2 gml:TimeTopologyPrimitivePropertyType 


gml:TimeTopologyPrimitivePropertyType provides for associating a gml:_TimeTopologyPrimitive with an 
object: 


  <complexType name="TimeTopologyPrimitivePropertyType"> 
    <sequence> 
      <element ref="gml:_TimeTopologyPrimitive" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
  </complexType> 
 


14.3.2.3 gml:TimeTopologyComplex 


Temporal topology complex shall be the connected acyclic directed graph composed of temporal topological 
primitives, i.e. time nodes and time edges. Because a time edge cannot exist without two time nodes on its 
boundaries, static features shall have time edges from temporal topology complex as the values of their 
temporal properties, regardless of explicit declarations. 


Temporal topology complex expresses a linear or a non-linear graph. A temporal linear graph, composed of a 
sequence of time edges, provides a lineage described only by substitution of feature instances or feature 
element values. A time node as the start or the end of the graph connects with at least one time edge. A time 
node other than the start and the end shall connect to at least two time edges: one of starting from the node, 
and another ending at the node.   


The element gml:TimeTopologyComplex is declared as follows: 


  <element name="TimeTopologyComplex" type="gml:TimeTopologyComplexType" 
substitutionGroup="gml:_TimeComplex"/> 
 
gml:TimeTopologyComplex may be used in any position that a gml:_ TimeComplex is valid.  Its content model 
is defined as follows: 


  <complexType name="TimeTopologyComplexType" abstract="true"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <extension base="gml:AbstractTimeComplexType"> 
        <sequence> 
          <element name="primitive" type="gml:TimeTopologyPrimitivePropertyType" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
        </sequence> 
      </extension> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
A temporal topological complex is a set of connected temporal topological primitives. The member primtives 
are indicated, either by reference or by value, using the primitive property.   


14.3.2.4 gml:TimeNode 


A time node is a zero-dimensional topological primitive that represents an identifiable node in time (it is 
equivalent to a point in space). A node may act as the termination or initiation of any number of time edges. A 
time node may be realised as a geometry, its position, whose value is a time instant.   


The element gml:TimeNode is declared as follows: 


  <element name="TimeNode" type="gml:TimeNodeType" substitutionGroup="gml:_TimeTopologyPrimitive"/> 
 
gml:TimeNode may be used in any position that a gml:_ TimeTopologyPrimitive is valid. Its content model is 
defined as follows: 


  <complexType name="TimeNodeType"> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


176  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


    <complexContent> 
      <extension base="gml:AbstractTimeTopologicalPrimitiveType"> 
        <sequence> 
          <element name="previousEdge" type="gml:TimeEdgePropertyType" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
          <element name="nextEdge" type="gml:TimeEdgePropertyType" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
          <element name="position" type="gml:TimeInstantPropertyType" minOccurs="0"/> 
        </sequence> 
      </extension> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 


14.3.2.5 gml:TimeNodePropertyType 


gml:TimeNodePropertyType provides for associating a gml:TimeNode with an object: 


  <complexType name="TimeNodePropertyType"> 
    <sequence> 
      <element ref="gml:TimeNode" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
  </complexType> 
 


14.3.2.6 gml:TimeEdge 


A time edge is a one-dimensional topological primitive. It is an open interval that starts and ends at a node. 
The edge may be realised as a geometry whose value is a time period 


The element gml:TimeEdge is declared as follows: 


  <element name="TimeEdge" type="gml:TimeEdgeType" substitutionGroup="gml:_TimeTopologylPrimitive"/> 
 
gml:TimeEdge may be used in any position that a gml:_ TimeTopologyPrimitive is valid.  Its content model is 
defined as follows: 


  <complexType name="TimeEdgeType"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <extension base="gml:AbstractTimeTopologylPrimitiveType"> 
        <sequence> 
          <element name="start" type="gml:TimeNodePropertyType"/> 
          <element name="end" type="gml:TimeNodePropertyType"/> 
          <element name="extent" type="gml:TimePeriodPropertyType" minOccurs="0"/> 
        </sequence> 
      </extension> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 


14.3.2.7 gml:TimeEdgePropertyType 


gml:TimeEdgePropertyType provides for associating a gml:TimeEdge with an object: 


  <complexType name="TimeEdgePropertyType"> 
    <sequence> 
      <element ref="gml:TimeEdge" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
  </complexType> 
 


14.3.2.8 gml:SuccessionType 


A temporal non-linear graph is a network composed of time edges. This provides a framework for describing 
successions of feature instances or feature property values described by substitution, division and fusion.  







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 177 
 


 


In support of application schemas that require this capability, the gml:SuccessionType is provided to ensure a 
consistent terminology. It is defined as follows: 


  <simpleType name="SuccessionType"> 
    <restriction base="string"> 
      <enumeration value="substitution"/> 
      <enumeration value="division"/> 
      <enumeration value="fusion"/> 
      <enumeration value="initiation"/> 
    </restriction> 
  </simpleType> 
 
Note that successions may occur not only in the geographic data. For example, a restructuring of organization 
and an explication of philosophy are not always related to positions on the Earth, but frequently be 
accompanied with division or fusion.    


 


14.4 Temporal reference systems 


14.4.1 Overview 


A value in the time domain is measured relative to a temporal reference system. Common types of reference 
systems include calendars, ordinal temporal reference systems, and temporal coordinate systems (time 
elapsed since some epoch, e.g. UNIX time, GPS time).  The primary temporal reference system for use with 
geographic information is the Gregorian Calendar and 24 hour local or Coordinated Universal Time (UTC), but 
special applications may entail the use of alternative reference systems.  The Julian day numbering system is 
a temporal coordinate system that has an origin earlier than any known calendar, at noon on 1 January 4713 
BC in the Julian proleptic calendar, and is useful in transformations between dates in different calendars.     


In GML seven concrete elements are used to describe temporal reference systems: TimeReferenceSystem, 
TimeCoordinateSystem, TimeCalendar, TimeCalendarEra, TimeClock, TimeOrdinalReferenceSystem, and 
TimeOrdinalEra.   


The types and elements for temporal reference systems are described in the schema listed in Annex C. The 
schema is identified by the following location-independent name (using URN syntax): 


urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-xsd:temporalReferenceSystems:v3.1.0 
 


14.4.2 Basic temporal reference system 


14.4.2.1 gml:TimeReferenceSystem 


A reference system is characterized in terms of its domain of validity: the spatial and temporal extent over 
which it is applicable. The basic GML element for temporal reference systems is gml:TimeReferenceSystem.  
Its content model simply extends gml:DefinitionType (see clause 15.2.1) with one property: domainOfValidity.  
In the schema this is implemented as follows: 


  <element name="TimeReferenceSystem" type="gml:TimeReferenceSystemType" substitutionGroup="gml:_GML"/> 
 
gml:TimeReferenceSystem may be used in any position that a GML Object (gml:_GML) is valid.  Its content 
model is defined as follows: 


  <complexType name="TimeReferenceSystemType"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <extension base="gml:DefinitionType"> 
        <sequence> 
          <element name="domainOfValidity" type="string"/> 
        </sequence> 
      </extension> 
    </complexContent> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


178  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


  </complexType> 
 
The standard properties of a GML object are inherited from gml:AbstractGMLType. This element might appear 
in an instance document as follows: 


<gml:TimeReferenceSystem gml:id="JulianCalendar"> 
  <gml:description xlink:href="http://aa.usno.navy.mil/data/docs/JulianDate.html"/> 
  <gml:name>Julian Calendar</gml:name> 
  <gml:domainOfValidity>Western Europe</gml:domainOfValidity> 
</gml:TimeReferenceSystem> 
 


14.4.3 Time Coordinate Systems 


A temporal coordinate system shall be based on a continuous interval scale defined in terms of a single time 
interval.   


14.4.3.1 gml:TimeCoordinateSystem 


The element gml:TimeCoordinateSystem is declared as follows: 


  <element name="TimeCoordinateSystem" type="gml:TimeCoordinateSystemType" 
   substitutionGroup="gml:TimeReferenceSystem"/> 
 
gml:TimeCoordinateSystem may be used in any position that a gml:TimeReferenceSystem is valid.  Its 
content model is defined as follows: 


  <complexType name="TimeCoordinateSystemType"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <extension base="gml:TimeReferenceSystemType"> 
        <sequence> 
          <choice> 
            <element name="originPosition" type="gml:TimePositionType"/> 
            <element name="origin" type="gml:TimeInstantPropertyType"/> 
          </choice> 
          <element name="interval" type="gml:TimeIntervalLengthType"/> 
        </sequence> 
      </extension> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
 The model follows TM_CoordinateSystem from ISO 19108, except in the following details: 


 the origin is specified either using the property gml:originPosition whose value is a direct time position 
(clause 14.2.3.6), or using the property gml:origin whose model is gml:TimeInstantPropertyType 
(clause 14.2.3.3): this permits more flexibility in representation and also supports referring to a value 
fixed elsewhere 


 the interval uses gml:TimeIntervalLengthType, defined in clause 14.2.3.7.  


Coordinate systems might be described in data instances as follows: 


<gml:TimeCoordinateSystem gml:id="Laser36"> 
  <gml:description>Time scale used during a laser experiment</gml:description> 
  <gml:name>Laser timescale 36</gml:name> 
  <gml:domainOfValidity>Laser laboratory</gml:domainOfValidity> 
  <gml:origin> 
    <gml:TimeInstant> 
      <gml:timePosition>2002-11-28T12:50:00+08:00</gml:timePosition> 
    </gml:TimeInstant> 
  </gml:origin> 
  <gml:interval unit=second radix=10 factor=12>1.0</gml:interval> 
</gml:TimeCoordinateSystem> 
 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 179 
 


 


<gml:TimeCoordinateSystem gml:id="geologyMa"> 
  <gml:name>Geological time system</gml:name>  
  <gml:domainOfValidity>Earth</gml:domainOfValidity> 
  <gml:origin> 
    <gml:TimeInstant> 
      <gml:description xlink:href="http://www.c14dating.com/agecalc.html">Conventional origin used for carbon dating.  
Equivalent to "present" for other radiometric dating techniques which have much lower precision.</gml:description> 
      <gml:timePosition>1950</gml:timePosition> 
    </gml:TimeInstant> 
  </gml:origin> 
  <gml:interval unit=year radix=10 factor=-6>1.0</gml:interval> 
</gml:TimeCoordinateSystem> 
 


14.4.4 Calendars and clocks 


Calendars and clocks are both based on interval scales. A calendar is a discrete temporal reference system 
that provides a basis for defining temporal position to a resolution of one day. A clock provides a basis for 
defining temporal position within a day. A clock must be used with a calendar in order to provide a complete 
description of a temporal position within a specific day. 


Calendars have a variety of complex internal structures. This schema defines a simple external calendar 
interface.  Every calendar provides a set of rules for composing a calendar date from a set of elements such 
as year, month, and day. In every calendar, years are numbered relative to the date of a reference event that 
defines a calendar era. A single calendar may reference more than one calendar era 


14.4.4.1 gml:TimeCalendar, gml:TimeCalendarEra 


A calendar is a discrete temporal reference system that provides a basis for defining temporal position to a 
resolution of one day.  The element gml:TimeCalendar is declared as follows: 


  <element name="TimeCalendar" type="gml:TimeCalendarType" substitutionGroup="gml:TimeReferenceSystem"/> 
 
gml:TimeCalendarEra may be used in any position that a gml:TimeReferenceSystem is valid.  Its content 
model is defined as follows: 


  <complexType name="TimeCalendarType"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <extension base="gml:TimeReferenceSystemType"> 
        <sequence> 
          <element name="referenceFrame" type="gml:TimeCalendarEraPropertyType" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
        </sequence> 
      </extension> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
  
gml:TimeCalendar adds one property to those inherited from gml:TimeReferenceSystem: 


referenceFrame:  link to a Calendar Era that it uses;  


A  gml:TimeCalendar may reference more than one Calendar Era.  The referenceFrame element follows the 
standard GML property model, allowing the association to be instantiated either using an inline description 
using the gml:TimeCalendarEra element, or a link to a description of the Calendar Era which is explicit 
elsewhere.   The gml:TimeCalendarEra element is declared as follows 


  <element name="TimeCalendarEra" type="gml:TimeCalendarEraType" /> 
  
Its content model is defined as follows: 


  <complexType name="TimeCalendarEraType"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <extension base="gml:DefinitionType"> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


180  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


        <sequence> 
          <element name="referenceEvent" type="gml:StringOrRefType"/> 
          <element name="referenceDate" type="gml:CalDate"/> 
          <element name="julianReference" type="decimal"/> 
          <element name="epochOfUse" type="gml:TimePeriodPropertyType"/> 
        </sequence> 
      </extension> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 


gml:TimeCalendarEra inherits basic properties from gml:DefinitionType (clause 15.2.1), has the following 
properties: 


referenceEvent:  Name or description of a mythical or historic event which fixes the position of the base scale 
of the calendar era.  This is given as text or using a link to description held elsewhere 


referenceDate:  Date of the referenceEvent expressed as a date in the given calendar.  In most calendars, this 
date is the origin (i.e., the first day) of the scale, but this is not always true 


julianReference:  Julian date that corresponds to the reference date.  The Julian day number is an integer 
value; the Julian date is a decimal value that allows greater resolution.  Transforming calendar dates to and 
from Julian dates provides a relatively simple basis for transforming dates from one calendar to another 


epochOfUse:  Period for which the calendar era was used as a basis for dating. 


14.4.4.2 gml:TimeClock 


A clock provides a basis for defining temporal position within a day.  A clock must be used with a calendar in 
order to provide a complete description of a temporal position within a specific day.  The element 
gml:TimeClock is declared as follows: 


<element name="TimeClock" type="gml:TimeClockType" substitutionGroup="gml:TimeReferenceSystem"/> 
 
gml:TimeClock may be used in any position that a gml:TimeReferenceSystem is valid.  Its content model is 
defined as follows: 


  <complexType name="TimeClockType" final="#all"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <extension base="gml:TimeReferenceSystemType"> 
        <sequence> 
          <element name="referenceEvent" type="gml:StringOrRefType"/> 
          <element name="referenceTime" type="time"/> 
          <element name="utcReference" type="time"/> 
          <element name="dateBasis" type="gml:TimeCalendarPropertyType" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
        </sequence> 
      </extension> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 


gml:TimeClock adds the following properties to those inherited from generic gml:TimeReferenceSystemType: 


referenceEvent:  Name or description of an event, such as solar noon or sunrise, which fixes the position of 
the base scale of the clock 


referenceTime:  time of day associated with the reference event expressed as a time of day in the given clock. 
The reference time is usually the origin of the clock scale.  


UtcReference:  24 hour local or UTC time that corresponds to the reference time. 


DateBasis: pointer to the calendars that use this clock.   







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 181 
 


 


14.4.5 Time Ordinal Reference Systems 


In some applications of geographic information  such as geology and archaeology  relative position in 
time is known more precisely than absolute time or duration. The order of events in time can be well 
established, but the magnitude of the intervals between them cannot be accurately determined; in such cases, 
the use of an ordinal temporal reference system is appropriate. An ordinal temporal reference system is 
composed of a sequence of named coterminous eras, which may in turn be composed of sequences of 
member eras at a finer scale, giving the whole a hierarchical structure of eras of verying resolution.  


An ordinal temporal reference system whose component eras are not further subdivided is effectively a 
temporal topological complex constrained to be a linear graph. An ordinal temporal reference system some or 
all of whose component eras are subdivided is effectively a temporal topological complex with the constraint 
that parallel branches may only be constructed in pairs where one is a single temporal ordinal era and the 
other is a sequence of temporal ordinal eras that are called "members" of the "group". This constraint means 
that within a single temporal ordinal reference system, the relative position of all temporal ordinal eras is 
unambiguous.   


The positions of the beginning and end of a given era may calibrate the relative time scale.  


14.4.5.1 gml:TimeOrdinalReferenceSystem, gml:TimeOrdinalEra 


The element gml:TimeOrdinalReferenceSystem implements this by adding a set of gml:component properties 
to the generic temporal reference system model.  It is declared as follows: 


  <element name="TimeOrdinalReferenceSystem" type="gml:TimeOrdinalReferenceSystemType" 
  substitutionGroup="gml:TimeReferenceSystem"/> 
 
gml:TimeOrdinalReferenceSystem may be used in any position that a gml:TimeReferenceSystem is valid.  Its 
content model is defined as follows: 


  <complexType name="TimeOrdinalReferenceSystemType"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <extension base="gml:TimeReferenceSystemType"> 
        <sequence> 
          <element name="component" type="gml:TimeOrdinalEraPropertyType" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
        </sequence> 
      </extension> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
The content model for gml:TimeOrdinalEra follows the pattern of gml:TimeEdge (clause 14.3.2.6), inheriting 
standard properties from gml:DefinitionType (clause 15.2.1), and adding gml:start, gml:end and gml:extent 
properties, a set of gml:member properties which indicate ordered gml:TimeOrdinalEra elements, and a 
gml:group property which points to the parent era.  This is implemented as follows: 


<element name="TimeOrdinalEra" type="gml:TimeOrdinalEraType"/> 
 
<complexType name="TimeOrdinalEraType"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <extension base="gml:DefinitionType"> 
        <sequence> 
          <element name="relatedTime" type="gml:RelatedTimeType" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
          <element name="start" type="gml:TimeNodePropertyType"/> 
          <element name="end" type="gml:TimeNodePropertyType"/> 
          <element name="extent" type="gml:TimePeriodPropertyType" minOccurs="0"/> 
          <element name="member" type="gml:TimeOrdinalEraPropertyType" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
          <element name="group" type="gml:ReferenceType" minOccurs="0"/> 
        </sequence> 
      </extension> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


182  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 
The model for the component and member properties follows the normal GML property pattern:  


 
  <complexType name="TimeOrdinalEraPropertyType"> 
    <sequence minOccurs="0"> 
      <element ref="gml:TimeOrdinalEra"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
  </complexType> 
 
The recursive inclusion of gml:TimeOrdinalEra elements allow the construction of am arbitrary depth 
hierarchical ordinal reference schema, such that an ordinal era at a given level of the hierarchy includes a 
sequence of shorter, coterminous ordinal eras. 


The example below shows a portion of the geological time scale depicted as an ordinal reference system: 


<gml:TimeOrdinalReferenceSystem gml:id="GeologicalTimeScale"> 
  <gml:description xlink:href="ftp://ftp.iugs.org/pub/iugs/iugs_intstratchart.pdf"/> 
  <gml:name>Geological time scale</gml:name> 
  <gml:domainOfValidity>Earth</gml:domainOfValidity> 
  <!-- Earlier eras omitted --> 
  <gml:component> 
    <gml:TimeOrdinalEra gml:id="Cenozoic"> 
      <gml:name>Cenozoic Era</gml:name> 
      <gml:start xlink:href="#basePaleocene"/> 
      <gml:end xlink:href="#now"/> 
      <gml:member> 
        <gml:TimeOrdinalEra gml:id="Tertiary"> 
          <gml:name>Tertiary Period</gml:name> 
          <gml:start xlink:href="#baseTertiary"/> 
          <gml:end xlink:href="#basePleistocene"/> 
          <gml:member> 
            <gml:TimeOrdinalEra gml:id="Paleogene"> 
              <gml:name>Paleogene sub-period</gml:name> 
              <gml:start> 
                <gml:TimeInstant gml:id="basePaleogene"> 
                  <gml:timePosition frame="#geologyMa">65.0</gml:timePosition> 
                </gml:TimeInstant> 
              </gml:start> 
              <gml:end xlink:href="#baseNeogene"/> 
              <gml:member> 
                <gml:TimeOrdinalEra gml:id="Paleocene"> 
                  <gml:name>Paleocene Epoch</gml:name> 
                  <gml:start xlink:href="#basePaleogene"/> 
                  <gml:end xlink:href="#baseEocene"/> 
                </gml:TimeOrdinalEra> 
              </gml:member> 
              <gml:member> 
                <gml:TimeOrdinalEra gml:id="Eocene"> 
                  <gml:name>Paleocene Epoch</gml:name> 
                  <gml:start > 
                    <gml:TimeInstant gml:id="baseEocene"> 
                      <gml:timePosition frame="#geologyMa">57.8</gml:timePosition> 
                    </gml:TimeInstant> 
                  </gml:start > 
                  <gml:end xlink:href="#baseOligocene"/> 
                </gml:TimeOrdinalEra> 
              </gml:member> 
              <gml:member> 
                <gml:TimeOrdinalEra gml:id="Oligocene"> 
                  <gml:name>Oligocene Epoch</gml:name> 
                  <gml:start > 
                    <gml:TimeInstant gml:id="baseOligocene"> 
                      <gml:timePosition frame="#geologyMa">33.7</gml:timePosition> 
                    </gml:TimeInstant> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 183 
 


 


                  </gml:start > 
                  <gml:end xlink:href="#baseNeogene"/> 
                </gml:TimeOrdinalEra> 
              </gml:member> 
            </gml:TimeOrdinalEra> 
          </gml:member> 
  <!-- Neogene sub-period and Quaternerary period omitted --> 
        </gml:TimeOrdinalEra> 
      </gml:member> 
    </gml:TimeOrdinalEra> 
  </gml:component> 
</gml:TimeOrdinalReferenceSystem> 
  
Note that the use of references on various begin and end elements allows the position of the boundaries 
between eras to be recorded once and then re-used many times as appropriate, corresponding to a non-linear 
graph when appropriate.  All positions refer to a frame geologyMa which would be defined as a temporal 
coordinate system (e.g see clause 14.4.3).   


14.5 Representing dynamic features  


14.5.1 Overview 


A number of types and relationships are defined to represent the time-varying properties of geographic 
features. The dynamic feature schema is listed in Annex C; it is identified by the following location-
independent name (using URN syntax): 


urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-xsd:dynamicFeature:v3.1.0 
 


In a comprehensive treatment of spatiotemporal modeling, Langran [see bibliography] distinguished three 
principal temporal entities: states, events, and evidence; this schema incorporates elements for each.  A 
simple UML model for dynamic features is shown in Figure. 


 


 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


184  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


Figure 3  Dynamic Features 


14.5.2 gml:dataSource 


In GML, evidence is represented by a simple dataSource property that indicates the source of the temporal 
data (e.g. human observer, in situ sensor). 


  <element name="dataSource" type="gml:StringOrRefType" abstract="true"/> 
 


14.5.3 Dynamic Properties 


A convenience group gml:dynamicProperties is defined in the schema as follows: 


  <group name="dynamicProperties"> 
    <sequence> 
      <element ref="gml:validTime" minOccurs="0"/> 
      <element ref="gml:history" minOccurs="0"/> 
      <element ref="gml:dataSource" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
  </group> 
 
This allows an application schema developer to include dynamic properties in a content model in a standard 
fashion.  The gml:validTime property is declared in temporal.xsd (described in clause 14.2.2.3 above).  The 
other properties are declared elsewhere in this clause.   


14.5.4 Dynamic Features 


States are captured by time-stamped instances of a feature or f eature collection.  The content model for a 
dynamic feature extends the standard AbstractFeatureType and FeatureCollectionType with the 
gml:dynamicProperties model group defined above:   


  <complexType name="DynamicFeatureType"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <extension base="gml:AbstractFeatureType"> 
        <group ref="gml:dynamicProperties"/> 
      </extension> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
  <complexType name="DynamicFeatureCollectionType"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <extension base="gml:FeatureCollectionType"> 
        <group ref="gml:dynamicProperties"/> 
      </extension> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
Each time-stamped instance represents a snapshot of a feature. The dynamic feature classes will normally 
be extended to suit particular applications.  A dynamic feature bears either a time stamp or a history. 


NOTE A history consists of a set of gml:TimeSlices and such time slices can contain any time varying properties.  We 
might for example use such a mechanism to describe a feature with one property that varies in time. 


14.5.5 gml:DynamicFeatureCollection 


A DynamicFeatureCollection is a FeatureCollection that has a validTime property (i.e. is a snapshot of the 
FeatureCollection) or which has a gml:history property that contains one or more gml:TimeSlices each of 
which contain values of the time varying properties of the FeatureCollection.  Note that the 
DynamicFeatureCollection can be one of the following: 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 185 
 


 


1. A FeatureCollection which consists of static feature members (members do not change in time) but 
which has properties of the collection object as a whole that do change in time (e.g. described by a 
history).  An example might be a Train.  The Train is a gml:FeatureCollection.  The position and speed 
of the train are time varying and could be captured in the history of the Train.  The featureMembers of 
the Train are the individual cars including the locomotive.  The properties of the cars are static such 
as the position of the car in the train (we ignore any re-organization of the train in this example), the 
cargo, the make of the car and its type (e.g. grain car, oil car etc.). 


2. A FeatureCollection which consists of dynamic feature members (the members are DynamicFeatures) 
but which also has properties of the collection as a whole that vary in time. An example could be a 
collection of sail boats in a yachting race.  The sail boats may disappear from the race or reappear.  
The area encompassing the boats in the race (think of a race like the Vende Globe would be time 
variant. 


NOTE One can also have a FeatureCollection with dynamic feature members but such that the properties of the 
collection as a whole are static. This might also be applied to the sail boat race where we only have properties like the 
organization committee, and the location of the starting point and finish line. 


14.5.6 gml:_TimeSlice 


To describe an event  an action that occurs at an instant or over an interval of time  GML provides the 
abstract TimeSlice element, which is declared in the schema as follows: 


  <element name="_TimeSlice" type="gml:AbstractTimeSliceType" abstract="true" substitutionGroup="gml:_GML"/> 
  
  <complexType name="AbstractTimeSliceType" abstract="true"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <extension base="gml:AbstractGMLType"> 
        <sequence> 
          <element ref="gml:validTime"/> 
          <element ref="gml:dataSource" minOccurs="0"/> 
        </sequence> 
      </extension> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
  
A timeslice encapsulates the time-varying properties of a dynamic feature -- it must be extended to represent 
a time stamped projection of a specific feature. The dataSource property describes how the temporal data 
was acquired. 


A TimeSlice instance is a GML object that encapsulates updates of the dynamicor volatileproperties that 
reflect some change event; it thus includes only those feature properties that have actually changed due to 
some process. For example, suppose that ownership of a building changes and it is renamed. If no other 
building properties have changed, then the event will only include the updated name. The TimeSlice class 
basically provides a facility for attribute-level time stamping, in contrast to the object-level time stamping of 
dynamic feature instances. 


The time slice can thus be viewed as event or process-oriented, whereas a snapshot is more state or 
structure-oriented. A timeslice has richer causality, whereas a snapshot merely portrays the status of the 
whole. For example, a feature collection might have a 'life cycle' represented by a sequence of snapshots 
(Figure Figure 14.4.6-2). 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


186  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 


Figure 14.4.6-2 The life cycle of a feature collection 


At instant t1, feature-A, feature-B, and feature-C are all members of the collection. However, at instant t2 only 
feature-A and feature-B are members. Closer examination of the history of feature-B will reveal its ephemeral 
nature (e.g. a building is dismantled and reconstructed on a seasonal basis). 


14.5.7 gml:MovingObjectStatus 


The gml:MovingObjectStatus element is one example of how the gml:TimeSlice may be extended.  This 
element provides a standard method to capture a  record of the status of a moving object.  It is declared as 
follows: 


  <element name="MovingObjectStatus" type="gml:MovingObjectStatusType" substitutionGroup="gml:TimeSlice"/> 
 
  <complexType name="MovingObjectStatusType"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <extension base="gml:AbstractTimeSliceType"> 
        <sequence> 
          <element ref="gml:position"/> 
          <element name="speed" type="gml:MeasureType" minOccurs="0"/> 
          <element name="bearing" type="gml:DirectionPropertyType" minOccurs="0"/> 
          <element name="acceleration" type="gml:MeasureType" minOccurs="0"/> 
          <element name="elevation" type="gml:MeasureType" minOccurs="0"/> 
          <element ref="gml:status" minOccurs="0"/> 
        </sequence> 
      </extension> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
A gml:MovingObjectStatus element allows the user to describe the present location, along with the speed, 
bearing, acceleration and elevation of an object in a particular time slice.   


Additional information about the current status of the object can be recorded in the gml:status element, 
declared as follows: 


  <element name="status" type="gml:StringOrRefType"/> 
 


14.5.8 gml:history 


A generic sequence of events constitute a history of an object.  This GML property element is declared in the 
schema as follows: 


  <element name="history" type="gml:HistoryPropertyType"/> 
 
  <complexType name="HistoryPropertyType"> 
    <sequence> 
      <element ref="gml:_TimeSlice" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
    </sequence> 
  </complexType> 
 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 187 
 


 


The gml:history element contains a set of elements in the substitution group headed by the abstract element 
gml:_TimeSlice, representing the time-varying properties of interest. The history property of a dynamic feature 
associates a feature instance with a sequence of time slices (i.e. change events) that encapsulate the 
evolution of the feature.  


14.5.9 gml:track 


A track is a specific kind of history.  The gml:track element is declared in the schema as follows: 


<element name="track" type="gml:TrackType" substitutionGroup="gml:history"/> 
 
  <complexType name="TrackType"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <restriction base="gml:HistoryPropertyType"> 
        <sequence> 
          <element ref="gml:MovingObjectStatus" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
        </sequence> 
      </restriction> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
If the feature represents a moving object such as a ground vehicle or a ship, then the track property 
comprises a sequence of MovingObjectStatus elements. For example, a dynamic feature such as a cyclone 
may have a gml:track property such as shown in the following fragment: 


<gml:track> 
  <gml:MovingObjectStatus> 
    <gml:validTime><gml:TimeInstant> 
      <gml:timePosition>2005-11-28T13:00:00</gml:timePosition> 
    </gml:TimeInstant></gml:validTime> 
    <gml:location><gml:Point> 
      <gml:pos>140. -35.</gml:pos> 
    </gml:Point></gml:location> 
    <gml:speed uom="#kph">12.</gml:speed> 
    <gml:bearing> 
      <gml:CompassPoint>SE</gml:CompassPoint> 
    </gml:bearing> 
  </gml:MovingObjectStatus> 
  <gml:MovingObjectStatus> 
    <gml:validTime><gml:TimeInstant> 
      <gml:timePosition>2005-11-28T14:00:00</gml:timePosition> 
    </gml:TimeInstant></gml:validTIme> 
    <gml:location><gml:Point> 
      <gml:pos>140.1 -34.9</gml:pos> 
    </gml:Point></gml:location> 
    <gml:speed uom="#kph">23.</gml:speed> 
    <gml:bearing> 
      <gml:CompassPoint>ESE</gml:CompassPoint> 
    </gml:bearing> 
  </gml:MovingObjectStatus> 
</gml:track> 
 


15 GML schemas  definitions and dictionaries 


15.1 Overview 


Many applications require definitions of terms, which are used within instance documents as the values of 
certain properties or as reference information to tie properties to standard information values in some way.  
Units of measure, and descriptions of measurable phenomena, are two particular examples.  







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


188  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


It will often be convenient to use definitions provided by external authorities. These may already be packaged 
for delivery in various ways, both online and offline. In order that they may be refered to from GML documents 
it is generally necessary that a URI be available for each definition. Where this is the case then it is usually 
preferable to refer to these directly.  


Alternatively, it may be convenient or necessary to capture definitions in XML, either embedded within an 
instance document containing Features or as a separate document. The definitions may be transcriptions from 
an external source, or may be new definitions for a local purpose. In order to support this case, some simple 
components are provided in GML in the form of  


a) a generic Definition, which may serve as the basis for more specialized definitions 


b) a generic Dictionary, also known as DefinitionCollection, which allows a set of definitions or 
references to definitions to be collected  


These components may be used directly, but also serve as the basis for more specialised definition elements 
in GML, in particular: coordinate operations (clause 12), coordinate reference systems (clause 12), datums 
(clause 12), temporal reference systems (clause 14), units of measure (clause 16).   


Note that the GML definition and dictionary components implement a simple nested hierarchy of definitions 
with identifiers. The latter provide handles which may be used in the description of more complex relationships 
between terms. However, the GML dictionary components are not intended to provide direct support for 
complex taxonomies, ontologies or thesauri.  Specialised XML tools are available to satisfy the more 
sophisticated requirements.   


15.2 Dictionary schema 


The dictionary schema is listed in Annex C; it is identified by the following location-independent name (using 
URN syntax): 


urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-xsd:dictionary:v3.1.0 
 


15.2.1 gml:Definition, gml:DefinitionType 


The basic Definition element is declared in the schema as follows: 


  <element name="Definition" type="gml:DefinitionType" substitutionGroup="gml:_GML"/> 
 
  <complexType name="DefinitionType"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <restriction base="gml:AbstractGMLType"> 
        <sequence> 
          <element ref="gml:metaDataProperty" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
          <element ref="gml:description" minOccurs="0"/> 
          <element ref="gml:name" minOccurs="1" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
        </sequence> 
        <attribute ref="gml:id" use="required"/> 
      </restriction> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
The content model for a generic definition is a simple derivation from AbstractGMLType.  Since it is necessary 
to be able to refer to a definition, the gml:id attribute which provides the database handle for a GML object is 
mandatory.  The "description" element shall hold the definition if this can be captured in a simple text string, or 
may carry a link to a description elsewhere.  The "name" elements shall provide one or more terms and 
synonyms for which this is the definition. The "metaDataProperty" elements may be used to reference or 
include more information about this definition.   







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 189 
 


 


15.2.2 gml:Dictionary, gml:DefinitionCollection, gml:DictionaryType 


Sets of definitions may be collected into dictionaries or collections.  These are declared in the schema as 
follows: 


  <element name="Dictionary" type="gml:DictionaryType" substitutionGroup="gml:Definition"/> 
 
  <element name="DefinitionCollection" type="gml:DictionaryType" substitutionGroup="gml:Definition"/> 
 
  <complexType name="DictionaryType"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <extension base="gml:DefinitionType"> 
        <choice minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
          <element ref="gml:dictionaryEntry"/> 
          <element ref="gml:indirectEntry"/> 
        </choice> 
      </extension> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
A Dictionary is a non-abstract collection of definitions.  These definitions are referenced from other places, in 
the same and different XML documents. 


The Dictionary content model adds a list of dictionaryEntry and indirectEntry properties that contain or 
reference Definition objects.  A database handle (gml:id attribute) is required, in order that this collection may 
be referred to.  The standard metaDataProperty, description and name are available to reference or contain 
more information about this dictionary. The inherited "description" element can be used for a description of 
this dictionary. The inherited "name" element can be used for the name(s) of this dictionary. 


15.2.3 gml:dictionaryEntry, gml:definitionMember, gml:DictionaryEntryType 


These elements contain or refer to the definitions which are members of this dictionary.  The element 
gml:dictionaryEntry is declared as follows: 


  <element name="dictionaryEntry" type="gml:DictionaryEntryType"/> 
 
  <element name="definitionMember" type="gml:DictionaryEntryType" substitutionGroup="gml:dictionaryEntry"/> 
 
  <complexType name="DictionaryEntryType"> 
    <sequence> 
      <element ref="gml:Definition" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
  </complexType> 
 
The content model follows the standard GML property pattern, so a gml:dictionaryEntry may either contain or 
refer to a single gml:Definition.  Since gml:Dictionary is substitutable for gml:Definition, the content of an entry 
can itself be a lower level dictionary or definition collection.  


Note that if the value is provided by reference, this definition does not carry a handle (gml:id) in this context, 
so does not allow external references to this specific definition in this context.  When used in this way the 
referenced definition will usually be in a dictionary in the same XML document.  


15.2.4 gml:indirectEntry, gml:IndirectEntryType, gml:DefinitionProxy, gml:DefinitionProxyType 


If a definition shall be included by reference, in its context within the current collection, then gml:indirectEntry 
shall be used.  This is declared as follows: 


  <element name="indirectEntry" type="gml:IndirectEntryType"/> 
 
  <complexType name="IndirectEntryType"> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


190  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


    <sequence> 
      <element ref="gml:DefinitionProxy"/> 
    </sequence> 
  </complexType> 
 
A gml:indirectEntry contains a proxy object gml:DefinitionProxy which is declared as follows: 


  <element name="DefinitionProxy" type="gml:DefinitionProxyType" substitutionGroup="gml:Definition"/> 
 
  <complexType name="DefinitionProxyType"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <extension base="gml:DefinitionType"> 
        <sequence> 
          <element ref="gml:definitionRef"/> 
        </sequence> 
      </extension> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
A gml:DefinitionProxy carries a mandatory handle (gml:id), and contains a reference to a definition 
represented elsewhere.  This entry is expected to be convenient in allowing multiple elements in one XML 
document to contain short (abbreviated XPointer) references, which are resolved to an external definition 
provided in a Dictionary element in the same XML document.  


The reference is carried by a gml:definitionRef element which is declared as follows.   


  <element name="definitionRef" type="gml:ReferenceType"/> 
 
This uses the gml:ReferenceType which is described in clause 7.5.3.2. The remote entry referenced can be in 
a dictionary in the same or different XML document.  


The following examples shows two instances of dictionaries:  


 <gml:Dictionary gml:id="rockTypes"> 
  <gml:description>A simple dictionary of rock types using components from gmlBase</gml:description> 
  <gml:name>Example dictionary of rock types</gml:name> 
  <gml:dictionaryEntry> 
    <gml:Definition gml:id="granite"> 
      <gml:description>A igneous rock normally composed of quartz, two feldspars and optional mica</gml:description> 
      <gml:name>Granite</gml:name> 
    </gml:Definition> 
  </gml:dictionaryEntry> 
  <gml:dictionaryEntry> 
    <gml:Definition gml:id="sst"> 
      <gml:description>A detrital sedimentary rock normally composed of siliceous grains</gml:description> 
      <gml:name>Sandstone</gml:name> 
    </gml:Definition> 
  </gml:dictionaryEntry> 
  <gml:indirectEntry> 
    <gml:DefinitionProxy gml:id="lst"> 
      <gml:definitionRef xlink:href=http://my.big.org/definitions/geology/limestone/> 
    </gml:DefinitionProxy> 
  </gml: indirectEntry> 
</gml:Dictionary> 
 
<gml:Dictionary gml:id="AbridgedGMLdictionary"> 
  <gml:description>Abridged GML dictionary.  See section 4 Terms and definitions for the rest.</gml:description> 
  <gml:name>GML dictionary</gml:name> 
  <gml:dictionaryEntry> 
    <gml:Definition gml:id="association"> 
      <gml:description>A structural relationship that describes a set of links, in which a link is a connection among objects; 
the semantic elationship between two or more classifiers that involves the connections among their instances (Booch, 
1999).</gml:description> 
      <gml:name>association</gml:name> 
    </gml:Definition> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 191 
 


 


  </gml:dictionaryEntry> 
  <gml:dictionaryEntry> 
    <gml:DefinitionCollection gml:id="attribute"> 
      <gml:description>named property</gml:description> 
      <gml:name>attribute</gml:name> 
      <gml:definitionMember> 
        <gml:Definition gml:id="attribute_in_UML"> 
          <gml:description>Named property of a class that describes the range of values that instances of the property may 
hold. (Booch,1999)</gml:description> 
          <gml:name codeSpace="UML">attribute</gml:name> 
        </gml:Definition> 
      </gml:definitionMember> 
      <gml:definitionMember> 
        <gml:Definition gml:id="attribute_in_XML"> 
          <gml:description>An information item in the XML Information Set [Infoset] </gml:description> 
          <gml:name codeSpace="XML">attribute</gml:name> 
        </gml:Definition> 
      </gml:definitionMember> 
    </gml:DefinitionCollection> 
  </gml:dictionaryEntry> 
  <gml:dictionaryEntry> 
    <gml:DefinitionCollection gml:id="property"> 
      <gml:description>A characteristic of an object</gml:description> 
      <gml:name>property</gml:name> 
      <gml:definitionMember> 
        <gml:Definition gml:id="property_in_GML"> 
          <gml:description>A characteristic of a GML object.</gml:description> 
          <gml:name codeSpace="GML">property</gml:name> 
        </gml:Definition> 
      </gml:definitionMember> 
      <gml:definitionMember> 
        <gml:DefinitionCollection gml:id="property_in_UML"> 
          <gml:description>A characteristic of a UML object.</gml:description> 
          <gml:name codeSpace="UML">property</gml:name> 
          <gml:dictionaryEntry xlink:href="#association"/> 
          <gml:dictionaryEntry xlink:href="#attribute_in_UML"/> 
        </gml:DefinitionCollection> 
      </gml:definitionMember> 
    </gml:DefinitionCollection> 
  </gml:dictionaryEntry> 
  <gml:indirectEntry> 
    <gml:DefinitionProxy gml:id="property_proxy"> 
      <gml:name>property</gml:name> 
      <gml:definitionRef xlink:href="#property"/> 
    </gml:DefinitionProxy> 
  </gml:indirectEntry> 
</gml:Dictionary> 


15.2.5 Using Definitions and Dictionaries 


Dictionaries and Definitions are GML Objects, so may be found in independent GML data instance 
documents.   


In application schemas it might be useful to attach a Dictionary or Definition Collection, or Definitions to a 
feature collection in order to record definitions used in properties of members of the collection.   


16 GML schemas  units, measures and values 


16.1 Introduction 


Several GML schemas introduce components that concern or require quantitative values which use a 
reference scale or units of measure.  In Clause 7.2, basicTypes.xsd provides MeasureType, MeasureListType 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


192  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


and MeasureOrNullListType definitions to enable GML properties and objects to carry units of measure, 
according to the following pattern: 


  abc:length uom = #m>100</abc:length> 
 
The attribute uom means unit of measure and holds a URI which refers to a resource that defines the units.  
The following schema documents describe components concerning this topic: 


 units.xsd declares a set of components for defining units of measure 


 measures.xsd declares a set of typed measures;  


 valueObjects.xsd describes structures for aggregates and lists of measures.   


The schema documents units.xsd, measures,xsd, and valueObjects,xsd define components for the description 
of measurement scales, typed measures, and generic (possibly complex) values, respectively.   


16.2 Units schema 


Several GML schemas define components that concern or require a reference scale or units of measure.  
Units are required for quantities that may occur as values of properties of feature types, as the results of 
observations, in the range parameters of a coverage, and for measures used in Coordinate Reference System 
definitions. The schema document units.xsd defines components to support the definition of units of measure.  
The units schema is listed in Annex C; it is identified by the following location-independent name (using URN 
syntax): 


urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-xsd:units:v3.0 
 


The basic unit definition is an extension of the general gml:Definition element defined in clause 15.2.  Three 
specialized elements for unit definition are further derived from this.  


This model is based on the SI system of units [ISO 1000], which distinguishes between Base Units and 
Derived Units.   


 Base Units are the preferred units for a set of orthogonal fundamental quantities which define the 
particular system of units, which may not be derived by combination of other base units.   


 Derived Units are the preferred units for other quantities in the system, which may be defined by 
algebraic combination of the base units.   


In some application areas Conventional units are used, which may be converted to the preferred units using 
a scaling factor or a formula which defines a re-scaling and offset.  The set of preferred units for all quantity 
types in a particular system of units is composed of the union of its base units and derived units.   


16.2.1 Using Unit Definitions  


Unit definitions are substitutable for the gml:Definition element declared as part of the dictionary model.  A 
dictionary that contains only unit definitions and references to unit definitions is a units dictionary.   


16.2.2 gml:unitOfMeasure, gml:UnitOfMeasureType 


The element gml:unitOfMeasure is a property element to refer to a unit of measure.  It is declared in the 
schema as follows: 


  <element name="unitOfMeasure" type="gml:UnitOfMeasureType"/> 
 
  <complexType name="UnitOfMeasureType"> 
    <sequence/> 
    <attribute name="uom" type="anyURI" use="required"/> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 193 
 


 


  </complexType> 
 
This is an empty element which carries a reference to a unit of measure definition.  This element may appear 
in a data instance as follows:  


  <unitOfMeasure uom="#m"/> 
 
  <unitOfMeasure uom="http://my.standards.org/units/length/metre"/> 
 
If the unit of measure definition is within the same XML document, the URI may be a barename Xpointer, in 
which the "#" symbol is prepended to the value of the attribute of XML type ID carried by the definition (e.g. 
gml:id).  For convenience, the ID may be a mnemonic abbreviation of the unit name.  Thus, in the first case 
the reference is to an element in the same document which carries gml:id=m.  In the second example the 
reference is to a definition provided by an external service.   


16.2.3 gml:UnitDefinition, gml:UnitDefinitionType 


A UnitDefinition is a general definition of a unit of measure. This generic element is used only for units for 
which no relationship with other units or units systems is known.  It is declared in the schema as follows:  


  <element name="UnitDefinition" type="gml:UnitDefinitionType" substitutionGroup="gml:Definition"/> 
 
  <complexType name="UnitDefinitionType"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <extension base="gml:DefinitionType"> 
        <sequence> 
          <element ref="gml:quantityType"/> 
          <element ref="gml:catalogSymbol" minOccurs="0"/> 
        </sequence> 
      </extension> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
The content model of gml:UnitDefinition adds two additional properties to gml:Definition (described in clause 
15.2.1), gml:quantityType and gml:catalogSymbol.  gml:quantityType. 


16.2.4 gml: quantityType 


 The gml:quantityType property indicates the phenomenon to which the units apply.  It is declared as follows:  


  <element name="quantityType" type="gml:StringOrRefType"/> 
 
This element contains an informal description of the phenomenon or type of quantity that is measured or 
observed. For example, "length", "angle", "time", "pressure", or "temperature". When the quantity is the result 
of an observation or measurement, this term is known as Observable Type or Measurand.  


16.2.5 gml:catalogSymbol 


The catalogSymbol is the preferred lexical symbol used for this unit of measure.  It is declared as follows: 


  <element name="catalogSymbol" type="gml:CodeType"/> 
 
The "codeSpace" attribute in "CodeType" identifies a namespace for the catalog symbol value, and might 
reference the external catalog. The "string" value in "CodeType" contains the value of a symbol that should be 
unique within this catalog namespace. This symbol often appears explicitly in the catalog, but it could be a 
combination of symbols using a specified algebra of units. For example, the symbol "cm" might indicate that it 
is the "m" symbol combined with the "c" prefix.  







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


194  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


16.2.6 gml:BaseUnit, gml:BaseUnitType, gml:unitsSystem 


A base unit is a unit of measure that cannot be derived by combination of other base units within a particular 
system of units.  For example, in the SI system of units, the base units are metre, kilogram, second, Ampere, 
Kelvin, mole, and candela, for the quantity types length, mass, time interval, electric current, thermodynamic 
temperature, amount of substance and luminous intensity, respectively.   


This is supported using the gml:BaseUnit element which is declared as follows: 


  <element name="BaseUnit" type="gml:BaseUnitType" substitutionGroup="gml:UnitDefinition"/> 
 
  <complexType name="BaseUnitType"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <extension base="gml:UnitDefinitionType"> 
        <sequence> 
          <element name="unitsSystem" type="gml:ReferenceType"/> 
        </sequence> 
      </extension> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
gml:BaseUnit extends generic gml:UnitDefinition with the property gml:unitsSystem, which carries a reference 
to the units system to which this base unit is asserted to belong.   


16.2.7 gml:DerivedUnit, gml:DerivedUnitType 


Derived units are defined by combination of other units.  Derived units are used for quantities other than those 
corresponding to the base units, such as hertz (s-1) for frequency, Newton (kg.m/s2) for force.  Derived units 
based directly on base units are usually preferred for quantities other than the fundamental quantities within a 
system. If a derived unit is not the preferred unit, the ConventionalUnit element should be used 
instead. The gml:DerivedUnit element is declared as follows: 


 <element name="DerivedUnit" type="gml:DerivedUnitType" substitutionGroup="gml:UnitDefinition"/> 
 
  <complexType name="DerivedUnitType"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <extension base="gml:UnitDefinitionType"> 
        <sequence> 
          <element ref="gml:derivationUnitTerm" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
        </sequence> 
      </extension> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
 The gml:DerivedUnit extends gml:UnitDefinition with the property gml:derivationUnitTerms.   


16.2.8 gml:derivationUnitTerms, gml:DerivationUnitTermType  


A set of gml:derivationUnitTerm elements describes a derived unit of measure.  Each element carries an 
integer exponent.  The terms are combined by raising each referenced unit to the power of their exponent and 
forming the product. The element gml:derivationUnitTerm is declared as follows: 
 
  <element name="derivationUnitTerm" type="gml:DerivationUnitTermType"/> 
 
  <complexType name="DerivationUnitTermType"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <extension base="gml:UnitOfMeasureType"> 
        <attribute name="exponent" type="integer"/> 
      </extension> 
    </complexContent> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 195 
 


 


  </complexType> 
 
This unit term references another unit of measure (uom) and provides an integer exponent applied to that unit 
in defining the compound unit. The exponent can be positive or negative, but not zero.  


16.2.9 gml:ConventionalUnit, gml:ConventionalUnitType  


Conventional units that are neither base units nor defined by direct combination of base units are used in 
many application domains.  For example electronVolt for energy, feet and nautical miles for length.  In most 
cases there is a known, usually linear, conversion to a preferred unit which is either a base unit or derived by 
direct combination of base units.  The gml:ConventionalUnit element is declared as follows: 


  <element name="ConventionalUnit" type="gml:ConventionalUnitType" substitutionGroup="gml:UnitDefinition"/> 
 
  <complexType name="ConventionalUnitType"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <extension base="gml:UnitDefinitionType"> 
        <sequence> 
          <choice> 
            <element ref="gml:conversionToPreferredUnit"/> 
            <element ref="gml:roughConversionToPreferredUnit"/> 
          </choice> 
          <element ref="gml:DerivationUnitTerm" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
        </sequence> 
      </extension> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
The gml:ConventionalUnit extends gml:UnitDefinition with a property that describes a conversion to a 
preferred unit for this quantity.  When the conversion is exact, the element gml:conversionToPreferredUnit 
should be used, or when the conversion is not exact the element gml:roughConversionToPreferredUnit is 
available. Both of these elements have the same content model.  The gml:derivationUnitTerm property 
defined above is included to allow a user to optionally record how this unit may be derived from other (more 
primitive) units.   


16.2.10 gml:conversionToPreferredUnit, gml:rouchConversionToPreferredUnit, 
gml:ConversionToPreferredUnitType, gml:FormulaType 


The elements gml:conversionToPreferredUnit and gml:roughConversionToPreferredUnit represent 
parameters used to convert conventional units to preferred units for this quantity type.  A preferred unit is 
either a Base Unit or a Derived Unit that is selected for all values of one quantity type.  These conversions are 
declared in the schema as follows: 


  <element name="conversionToPreferredUnit" type="gml:ConversionToPreferredUnitType"/> 
 
  <element name="roughConversionToPreferredUnit" type="gml:ConversionToPreferredUnitType"/> 
 
  <complexType name="ConversionToPreferredUnitType"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <extension base="gml:UnitOfMeasureType"> 
        <choice> 
          <element name="factor" type="double"/> 
          <element name="formula" type="gml:FormulaType"/> 
        </choice> 
      </extension> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
The inherited attribute "uom" references the preferred unit that this conversion applies to. The conversion of a 
unit to the preferred unit for this quantity type is specified by an arithmetic conversion (scaling and/or offset). 
The content model extends gml:UnitOfMeasureType, which has a mandatory attribute uom which identifies 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


196  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


the preferred unit for the quantity type that this conversion applies to. The conversion is specified by a choice 
of  


gml:factor, which defines the scale factor  


gml:formula, which defines a formula  


by which a value using the conventional unit of measure can be converted to obtain the corresponding value 
using the preferred unit of measure.  The model for the formula is given as follows: 


  <complexType name="FormulaType"> 
    <sequence> 
      <element name="a" type="double" minOccurs="0"/> 
      <element name="b" type="double"/> 
      <element name="c" type="double"/> 
      <element name="d" type="double" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
  </complexType> 
 
This formula defines the parameters of a simple formula by which a value using the conventional unit of 
measure can be converted to the corresponding value using the preferred unit of measure. The formula 
element contains elements a, b, c and d, whose values use the XML Schema type "double". These values are 
used in the formula y = (a + bx) / (c + dx), where x is a value using this unit, and y is the corresponding value 
using the base unit. The elements a and d are optional, and if values are not provided, those parameters are 
considered to be zero. If values are not provided for both a and d, the formula is equivalent to a fraction with 
numerator and denominator parameters.  


16.2.11 Example of units dictionary  


This dictionary contains definitions corresponding to all the base and derived units defined by in the SI system 
[SI], plus a selection of conventional units to illustrate the usage of these components.   


<gml:Dictionary gml:id="unitsDictionary"> 
  <gml:description>A dictionary of units of measure</gml:description> 
  <gml:name>OWS-1.2 Units</gml:name> 
  <gml:dictionaryEntry> 
    <gml:DefinitionCollection gml:id="SIBaseUnits"> 
      <gml:description>The Base Units from the SI units system.</gml:description> 
      <gml:name>SI Base Units</gml:name> 
      <gml:dictionaryEntry> 
        <gml:BaseUnit gml:id="m"> 
          <gml:description>The metre is the length of the path travelled by light in vacuum during a time interval of 1/299 792 
458 of a second.</gml:description> 
          <gml:name codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI/base_units.html">metre</gml:name> 
          <gml:name xml:lang="en/US">meter</gml:name> 
          <gml:quantityType>length</gml:quantityType> 
          <gml:catalogSymbol codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI/base_units.html">m</gml:catalogSymbol> 
          <gml:unitsSystem xlink:href="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI"/> 
        </gml:BaseUnit> 
      </gml:dictionaryEntry> 
      <gml:dictionaryEntry> 
        <gml:BaseUnit gml:id="kg"> 
          <gml:description>The kilogram is the unit of mass; it is equal to the mass of the international prototype of the 
kilogram. </gml:description> 
          <gml:name codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI/base_units.html">kilogram</gml:name> 
          <gml:quantityType>Mass</gml:quantityType> 
          <gml:catalogSymbol codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI/base_units.html">kg</gml:catalogSymbol> 
          <gml:unitsSystem xlink:href="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI"/> 
        </gml:BaseUnit> 
      </gml:dictionaryEntry> 
      <gml:dictionaryEntry> 
        <gml:BaseUnit gml:id="s"> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 197 
 


 


          <gml:description>The second is the duration of 9 192 631 770 periods of the radiation corresponding to the 
transition between the two hyperfine levels of the ground state of the caesium 133 atom.</gml:description> 
          <gml:name codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI/base_units.html">second</gml:name> 
          <gml:quantityType>Time</gml:quantityType> 
          <gml:catalogSymbol codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI/base_units.html">s</gml:catalogSymbol> 
          <gml:unitsSystem xlink:href="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI"/> 
        </gml:BaseUnit> 
      </gml:dictionaryEntry> 
      <gml:dictionaryEntry> 
        <gml:BaseUnit gml:id="A"> 
          <gml:description>The ampere is that constant current which, if maintained in two straight parallel conductors of 
infinite length, of negligible circular cross-section, and placed 1 metre apart in vacuum, would produce between these 
conductors a force equal to 2  10-7 newton per metre of length. 
</gml:description> 
          <gml:name codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI">Ampere</gml:name> 
          <gml:quantityType>Electric current</gml:quantityType> 
          <gml:catalogSymbol codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI">A</gml:catalogSymbol> 
          <gml:unitsSystem xlink:href="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI"/> 
        </gml:BaseUnit> 
      </gml:dictionaryEntry> 
      <gml:dictionaryEntry> 
        <gml:BaseUnit gml:id="K"> 
          <gml:description>The kelvin, unit of thermodynamic temperature, is the fraction 1/273.16 of the thermodynamic 
temperature of the triple point of water.</gml:description> 
          <gml:name codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI">kelvin</gml:name> 
          <gml:quantityType>Thermodynamic temperature</gml:quantityType> 
          <gml:catalogSymbol codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI">K</gml:catalogSymbol> 
          <gml:unitsSystem xlink:href="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI"/> 
        </gml:BaseUnit> 
      </gml:dictionaryEntry> 
      <gml:dictionaryEntry> 
        <gml:BaseUnit gml:id="mol"> 
          <gml:description>1. The mole is the amount of substance of a system which contains as many elementary entities 
as there are atoms in 0.012 kilogram of carbon 12.  
2. When the mole is used, the elementary entities shall be specified and may be atoms, molecules, ions, electrons, other 
particles, or specified groups of such particles. </gml:description> 
          <gml:name codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI">mole</gml:name> 
          <gml:quantityType>Amount of substance</gml:quantityType> 
          <gml:catalogSymbol codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI">mol</gml:catalogSymbol> 
          <gml:unitsSystem xlink:href="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI"/> 
        </gml:BaseUnit> 
      </gml:dictionaryEntry> 
      <gml:dictionaryEntry> 
        <gml:BaseUnit gml:id="cd"> 
          <gml:description> The candela is the luminous intensity, in a given direction, of a source that emits monochromatic 
radiation of frequency 540  1012 hertz and that has a radiant intensity in that direction of 1/683 watt per 
steradian.</gml:description> 
          <gml:name codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI">candela</gml:name> 
          <gml:quantityType>Luminous intensity</gml:quantityType> 
          <gml:catalogSymbol codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI">cd</gml:catalogSymbol> 
          <gml:unitsSystem xlink:href="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI"/> 
        </gml:BaseUnit> 
      </gml:dictionaryEntry> 
    </gml:DefinitionCollection> 
  </gml:dictionaryEntry> 
  <gml:dictionaryEntry> 
    <gml:DefinitionCollection gml:id="SIDerivedUnits"> 
      <gml:description>The Derived Units from the SI units system.  These are all derived as a product of SI Base Units, 
except degrees Celsius in which the conversion formaula to the SI Base Unit (kelvin) involves an offset.  
</gml:description> 
      <gml:name>SI Derived Units</gml:name> 
      <gml:dictionaryEntry> 
        <gml:DerivedUnit gml:id="rad"> 
          <gml:name codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI"> radian</gml:name> 
          <gml:quantityType>plane angle</gml:quantityType> 
          <gml:catalogSymbol codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI">rad</gml:catalogSymbol> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


198  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


          <gml:derivationUnitTerm  uom="#m" exponent="1"/> 
          <gml:derivationUnitTerm uom="#m" exponent="-1"/> 
        </gml:DerivedUnit> 
      </gml:dictionaryEntry> 
      <gml:dictionaryEntry> 
        <gml:DerivedUnit gml:id="sr"> 
          <gml:name codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI">steradian</gml:name> 
          <gml:quantityType>solid angle</gml:quantityType> 
          <gml:catalogSymbol codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI">sr</gml:catalogSymbol> 
          <gml:derivationUnitTerm uom="#m" exponent="2"/> 
          <gml:derivationUnitTerm uom="#m" exponent="-2"/> 
        </gml:DerivedUnit> 
      </gml:dictionaryEntry> 
      <gml:dictionaryEntry> 
        <gml:DerivedUnit gml:id="Hz"> 
          <gml:name codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI">hertz</gml:name> 
          <gml:quantityType>frequency</gml:quantityType> 
          <gml:catalogSymbol codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI">Hz</gml:catalogSymbol> 
          <gml:derivationUnitTerm uom="#s" exponent="-1"/> 
        </gml:DerivedUnit> 
      </gml:dictionaryEntry> 
      <gml:dictionaryEntry> 
        <gml:DerivedUnit gml:id="N"> 
          <gml:name codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI">newton</gml:name> 
          <gml:quantityType>force</gml:quantityType> 
          <gml:catalogSymbol codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI">N</gml:catalogSymbol> 
          <gml:derivationUnitTerm uom="#m" exponent="1"/> 
          <gml:derivationUnitTerm uom="#kg" exponent="1"/> 
          <gml:derivationUnitTerm uom="#s" exponent="-2"/> 
        </gml:DerivedUnit> 
      </gml:dictionaryEntry> 
      <gml:dictionaryEntry> 
        <gml:DerivedUnit gml:id="Pa"> 
          <gml:name codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI">pascal</gml:name> 
          <gml:quantityType>pressure, stress</gml:quantityType> 
          <gml:catalogSymbol codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI">Pa</gml:catalogSymbol> 
          <gml:derivationUnitTerm uom="#N" exponent="1"/> 
          <gml:derivationUnitTerm uom="#m" exponent="-2"/> 
        </gml:DerivedUnit> 
      </gml:dictionaryEntry> 
      <gml:dictionaryEntry> 
        <gml:DerivedUnit gml:id="J"> 
          <gml:name codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI">joule</gml:name> 
          <gml:quantityType>energy, work, quantity of heat</gml:quantityType> 
          <gml:catalogSymbol codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI">J</gml:catalogSymbol> 
          <gml:derivationUnitTerm uom="#N" exponent="1"/> 
          <gml:derivationUnitTerm uom="#m" exponent="1"/> 
        </gml:DerivedUnit> 
      </gml:dictionaryEntry> 
      <gml:dictionaryEntry> 
        <gml:DerivedUnit gml:id="W"> 
          <gml:name codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI">watt</gml:name> 
          <gml:quantityType>power, radiant flux</gml:quantityType> 
          <gml:catalogSymbol codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI">W</gml:catalogSymbol> 
          <gml:derivationUnitTerm uom="#J" exponent="1"/> 
          <gml:derivationUnitTerm uom="#s" exponent="-1"/> 
        </gml:DerivedUnit> 
      </gml:dictionaryEntry> 
      <gml:dictionaryEntry> 
        <gml:DerivedUnit gml:id="C"> 
          <gml:name codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI">coulomb</gml:name> 
          <gml:quantityType>electric charge, quantity of electricity</gml:quantityType> 
          <gml:catalogSymbol codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI">C</gml:catalogSymbol> 
          <gml:derivationUnitTerm uom="#s" exponent="1"/> 
          <gml:derivationUnitTerm uom="#A" exponent="1"/> 
        </gml:DerivedUnit> 
      </gml:dictionaryEntry> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 199 
 


 


      <gml:dictionaryEntry> 
        <gml:DerivedUnit gml:id="V"> 
          <gml:name codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI">volt</gml:name> 
          <gml:quantityType>electric potential difference, electromotive force</gml:quantityType> 
          <gml:catalogSymbol codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI">V</gml:catalogSymbol> 
          <gml:derivationUnitTerm uom="#W" exponent="1"/> 
          <gml:derivationUnitTerm uom="#A" exponent="-1"/> 
        </gml:DerivedUnit> 
      </gml:dictionaryEntry> 
      <gml:dictionaryEntry> 
        <gml:DerivedUnit gml:id="F"> 
          <gml:name codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI">farad</gml:name> 
          <gml:quantityType>capacitance</gml:quantityType> 
          <gml:catalogSymbol codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI">F</gml:catalogSymbol> 
          <gml:derivationUnitTerm uom="#C" exponent="1"/> 
          <gml:derivationUnitTerm uom="#V" exponent="-1"/> 
        </gml:DerivedUnit> 
      </gml:dictionaryEntry> 
      <gml:dictionaryEntry> 
        <gml:DerivedUnit gml:id="ohm"> 
          <gml:name codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI">ohm</gml:name> 
          <gml:quantityType>electric resistance</gml:quantityType> 
          <gml:catalogSymbol codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI">? </gml:catalogSymbol> 
          <gml:derivationUnitTerm uom="#V" exponent="1"/> 
          <gml:derivationUnitTerm uom="#A" exponent="-1"/> 
        </gml:DerivedUnit> 
      </gml:dictionaryEntry> 
      <gml:dictionaryEntry> 
        <gml:DerivedUnit gml:id="S"> 
          <gml:name codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI">siemens</gml:name> 
          <gml:quantityType>electric conductance</gml:quantityType> 
          <gml:catalogSymbol codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI">S</gml:catalogSymbol> 
          <gml:derivationUnitTerm uom="#A" exponent="1"/> 
          <gml:derivationUnitTerm uom="#V" exponent="-1"/> 
        </gml:DerivedUnit> 
      </gml:dictionaryEntry> 
      <gml:dictionaryEntry> 
        <gml:DerivedUnit gml:id="Wb"> 
          <gml:name codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI">weber</gml:name> 
          <gml:quantityType>magnetic flux</gml:quantityType> 
          <gml:catalogSymbol codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI">Wb</gml:catalogSymbol> 
          <gml:derivationUnitTerm uom="#V" exponent="1"/> 
          <gml:derivationUnitTerm uom="#s" exponent="1"/> 
        </gml:DerivedUnit> 
      </gml:dictionaryEntry> 
      <gml:dictionaryEntry> 
        <gml:DerivedUnit gml:id="T"> 
          <gml:name codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI">tesla</gml:name> 
          <gml:quantityType>magnetic flux density</gml:quantityType> 
          <gml:catalogSymbol codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI">T</gml:catalogSymbol> 
          <gml:derivationUnitTerm uom="#Wb" exponent="1"/> 
          <gml:derivationUnitTerm uom="#m" exponent="-2"/> 
        </gml:DerivedUnit> 
      </gml:dictionaryEntry> 
      <gml:dictionaryEntry> 
        <gml:DerivedUnit gml:id="H"> 
          <gml:name codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI">henry</gml:name> 
          <gml:quantityType>inductance</gml:quantityType> 
          <gml:catalogSymbol codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI">H</gml:catalogSymbol> 
          <gml:derivationUnitTerm uom="#Wb" exponent="1"/> 
          <gml:derivationUnitTerm uom="#A" exponent="-1"/> 
        </gml:DerivedUnit> 
      </gml:dictionaryEntry> 
      <gml:dictionaryEntry> 
        <gml:ConventionalUnit gml:id="degC"> 
          <gml:name codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI">degree Celsius</gml:name> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


200  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


          <gml:quantityType>Celsius temperature</gml:quantityType> 
          <gml:catalogSymbol codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI">C</gml:catalogSymbol> 
          <gml:conversionToPreferredUnit uom="#K"> 
            <gml:formula> 
              <gml:a>273.16</gml:a> 
              <gml:b>1</gml:b> 
              <gml:c>1</gml:c> 
            </gml:Formula> 
          </gml:conversionToPreferredUnit> 
        </gml:ConventionalUnit> 
      </gml:dictionaryEntry> 
      <gml:dictionaryEntry> 
        <gml:DerivedUnit gml:id="lm"> 
          <gml:name codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI">lumen</gml:name> 
          <gml:quantityType>luminous flux</gml:quantityType> 
          <gml:catalogSymbol codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI">lm</gml:catalogSymbol> 
          <gml:derivationUnitTerm uom="#cd" exponent="1"/> 
          <gml:derivationUnitTerm uom="#sr" exponent="1"/> 
        </gml:DerivedUnit> 
      </gml:dictionaryEntry> 
      <gml:dictionaryEntry> 
        <gml:DerivedUnit gml:id="lx"> 
          <gml:name codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI">lux</gml:name> 
          <gml:quantityType>illuminance</gml:quantityType> 
          <gml:catalogSymbol codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI">lx</gml:catalogSymbol> 
          <gml:derivationUnitTerm uom="#lm" exponent="1"/> 
          <gml:derivationUnitTerm uom="#m" exponent="-2"/> 
        </gml:DerivedUnit> 
      </gml:dictionaryEntry> 
      <gml:dictionaryEntry> 
        <gml:DerivedUnit gml:id="Bq"> 
          <gml:name codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI">becquerel</gml:name> 
          <gml:quantityType>activity (referred to a radionuclide)</gml:quantityType> 
          <gml:catalogSymbol codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI">Bq</gml:catalogSymbol> 
          <gml:derivationUnitTerm uom="#s" exponent="-1"/> 
        </gml:DerivedUnit> 
      </gml:dictionaryEntry> 
      <gml:dictionaryEntry> 
        <gml:DerivedUnit gml:id="Gy"> 
          <gml:name codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI">gray</gml:name> 
          <gml:quantityType>absorbed dose, specific energy (imparted), kerma</gml:quantityType> 
          <gml:catalogSymbol codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI">Gy</gml:catalogSymbol> 
          <gml:derivationUnitTerm uom="#J" exponent="1"/> 
          <gml:derivationUnitTerm uom="#kg" exponent="-1"/> 
        </gml:DerivedUnit> 
      </gml:dictionaryEntry> 
      <gml:dictionaryEntry> 
        <gml:DerivedUnit gml:id="Sv"> 
          <gml:name codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI">sievert</gml:name> 
          <gml:quantityType>dose equivalent, ambient dose equivalent, directional dose equivalent, personal dose 
equivalent, organ equivalent dose</gml:quantityType> 
          <gml:catalogSymbol codeSpace="http://www.bipm.fr/en/3_SI">Sv</gml:catalogSymbol> 
          <gml:derivationUnitTerm uom="#J" exponent="1"/> 
          <gml:derivationUnitTerm uom="#kg" exponent="-1"/> 
        </gml:DerivedUnit> 
      </gml:dictionaryEntry> 
    </gml:DefinitionCollection> 
  </gml:dictionaryEntry> 
  <gml:dictionaryEntry> 
    <gml:DefinitionCollection gml:id="ConventionalUnitsDictionary"> 
      <gml:description>A collection of Conventional Units.  These are units of measure which are either widely used or 
important within a specific community.  For most of these there is  
1. a known derivation from more primitive units, which may or may not be SI Base Units, or  
2. a known conversion to a preferred unit, which may or may not be an SI Base or Derived unit, through rescaling and 
offset,  
or both.  </gml:description> 
      <gml:name>Conventional units.</gml:name> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 201 
 


 


      <gml:dictionaryEntry> 
        <gml:ConventionalUnit gml:id="GHz"> 
          <gml:name>GigaHertz</gml:name> 
          <gml:quantityType>frequency</gml:quantityType> 
          <gml:catalogSymbol>GHz</gml:catalogSymbol> 
          <gml:conversionToPreferredUnit uom="#Hz"> 
            <gml:factor>1.e9</gml:factor> 
          </gml:conversionToPreferredUnit> 
        </gml:ConventionalUnit> 
      </gml:dictionaryEntry> 
      <gml:dictionaryEntry> 
        <gml:ConventionalUnit gml:id="cal"> 
          <gml:name>Calorie</gml:name> 
          <gml:quantityType>energy</gml:quantityType> 
          <gml:catalogSymbol>cal</gml:catalogSymbol> 
          <gml:conversionToPreferredUnit uom="#J"> 
            <gml:factor>4.1868</gml:factor> 
          </gml:conversionToPreferredUnit> 
        </gml:ConventionalUnit> 
      </gml:dictionaryEntry> 
      <gml:dictionaryEntry> 
        <gml:DerivedUnit gml:id="m3"> 
          <gml:name>cubic metre</gml:name> 
          <gml:quantityType>Volume</gml:quantityType> 
          <gml:derivationUnitTerm uom="#m" exponent="3"/> 
        </gml:DerivedUnit> 
      </gml:dictionaryEntry> 
      <gml:dictionaryEntry> 
        <gml:ConventionalUnit gml:id="l"> 
          <gml:name>litre</gml:name> 
          <gml:quantityType>Volume</gml:quantityType> 
          <gml:conversionToPreferredUnit uom="#m3"> 
            <gml:factor>0.001</gml:factor> 
          </gml:conversionToPreferredUnit> 
        </gml:ConventionalUnit> 
      </gml:dictionaryEntry> 
      <gml:dictionaryEntry> 
        <gml:ConventionalUnit gml:id="poise"> 
          <gml:name>poise</gml:name> 
          <gml:quantityType>dynamic viscosity</gml:quantityType> 
          <gml:catalogSymbol>po</gml:catalogSymbol> 
          <gml:conversionToPreferredUnit uom="#Pa.s"> 
            <gml:factor>0.1</gml:factor> 
          </gml:conversionToPreferredUnit> 
          <gml:derivationUnitTerm uom="#cm" exponent="-1"/> 
          <gml:derivationUnitTerm uom="#g" exponent="1"/> 
          <gml:derivationUnitTerm uom="#s" exponent="1"/> 
        </gml:ConventionalUnit> 
      </gml:dictionaryEntry> 
      <gml:dictionaryEntry> 
        <gml:ConventionalUnit gml:id="ft"> 
          <gml:name>foot</gml:name> 
          <gml:quantityType>length</gml:quantityType> 
          <gml:catalogSymbol>ft</gml:catalogSymbol> 
          <gml:conversionToPreferredUnit uom="#m"> 
            <gml:factor>0.3048</gml:factor> 
          </gml:conversionToPreferredUnit> 
        </gml:ConventionalUnit> 
      </gml:dictionaryEntry> 
    </gml:DefinitionCollection> 
  </gml:dictionaryEntry> 
</gml:Dictionary> 
 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


202  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


16.3 Measures schema 


A schema for specific measure types is listed in Annex C; it is identified by the following location-independent 
name (using URN syntax): 


urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-xsd:measures:v3.0 
 


gml:MeasureType is defined in basicTypes.xsd.  The measure types defined here correspond with a set of 
convenience measure types described in ISO 19103.  The XML implementation is based on the XML Schema 
simpleType double which supports both decimal and scientific notation, and includes an XML attribute uom 
which refers to the units of measure for the value.  Note that, there is no requirement to store values using any 
particular format, and applications receiving elements of this type may choose to coerce the data to any other 
type as convenient.  


16.3.1 gml:measure 


This is the value of a quantity, together with its units. It is declared as follows: 


  <element name="measure" type="gml:MeasureType"/> 
 
In an instance document the element might appear: 


  <gml:measure uom="#m">1.76</gml:measure> 
 


The XML attribute uom is used to hold a reference to the scale or units by which the amount should be multiplied.   


The "uom" attribute uses a URI to refer to a unit of measure definition.  The definition may be within the same XML 
document or external.  A definition within the same document would normally use the UnitDefinition element described 
above, which carries an ID handle as the value of its gml:id attribute.  A measure element referring to this definition would 
normally use the abbreviated Xpointer form of URI.   


For convenience the handle on the definition (the value of the gml:id attribute) will normally be mnemonic based on the 
unit name, such as m for metre.  So if the definition is in the same document as the reference, the URI may be an 
abbreviated Xpointer reference [URI] which is presented with the "#" symbol prepended to the handle, i.e. #m as in this 
example.  


16.3.2 Scalar measure types 


A set of specific measure types are defined as vacuous extensions (i.e. aliases) of gml:MeasureType.  A 
prototypical definition is as follows: 


  <complexType name="LengthType"> 
    <simpleContent> 
      <extension base="gml:MeasureType"/> 
    </simpleContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
This content model supports the description of a length (or distance) quantity, with its units. The unit of 
measure referenced by uom shall be suitable for a length, such as metres or feet. 


The other measure types that are defined following this pattern are: ScaleType, GridLengthType, AreaType, 
VolumeType, SpeedType, TimeType.   


Elements using these content models might appear in a data instance as follows: 


<my:length uom="#m">1.76</my:length> 
 
<my:scale uom="#percent">20.</my:scale> 
 
<my:gridLength uom="#pixelSpacing">480</my:gridLength> 
 
<my:gridLength uom="#imageHeight">0.00208333333333</my:gridLength> 
 
<my:area uom="#Ha">1.76</my:area> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 203 
 


 


 
<my:volume uom="#l">0.45</my:volume> 
 
<my:speed uom="#kmph">73.0</my:speed> 
 
<my:time uom="#minutes">30.</my:time> 
 
Note that the last element addresses the same functional requirements as the elements in the 
gml:_timeLength substitution group, defined in clause 14.   


 


16.3.3 gml:angle 


The gml:angle element is used to record the value of an angle quantity as a single number, with its units. 
gml:AngleType is derived trivially from gml:MeasureType using the method described above, with the 
restriction that the unit of measure referenced by uom shall be suitable for an angle, such as degrees or 
radians.  It is declared in the schema as follows:   


  <element name="angle" type="gml:AngleType"/> 
 
  <complexType name="AngleType"> 
    <simpleContent> 
      <extension base="gml:MeasureType"/> 
    </simpleContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
In an instance document the element might appear: 


<gml:angle uom="#gradians">95.</gml:angle> 
 


16.3.4 gml:dmsAngle 


The gml:dmsAngle element is used to record the value of an angle in degree-minute-second or degree-minute 
format.  It uses the following schema declarations:   


  <element name="dmsAngle" type="gml:DMSAngleType"/> 
 
  <complexType name="DMSAngleType"> 
    <sequence> 
      <element ref="gml:degrees"/> 
      <choice minOccurs="0"> 
        <element ref="gml:decimalMinutes"/> 
        <sequence> 
          <element ref="gml:minutes"/> 
          <element ref="gml:seconds" minOccurs="0"/> 
        </sequence> 
      </choice> 
    </sequence> 
  </complexType> 
 
  <element name="degrees" type="gml:DegreesType"/> 
 
  <complexType name="DegreesType"> 
    <simpleContent> 
      <extension base="gml:DegreeValueType"> 
        <attribute name="direction"> 
          <simpleType> 
            <restriction base="string"> 
              <enumeration value="N"/> 
              <enumeration value="E"/> 
              <enumeration value="S"/> 
              <enumeration value="W"/> 
              <enumeration value="+"/> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


204  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


              <enumeration value="-"/> 
            </restriction> 
          </simpleType> 
        </attribute> 
      </extension> 
    </simpleContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
  <simpleType name="DegreeValueType"> 
    <restriction base="nonNegativeInteger"> 
      <maxInclusive value="359"/> 
    </restriction> 
  </simpleType> 
 
  <element name="decimalMinutes" type="gml:DecimalMinutesType"/> 
 
  <simpleType name="DecimalMinutesType"> 
    <restriction base="decimal"> 
      <minInclusive value="0.00"/> 
      <maxExclusive value="60.00"/> 
    </restriction> 
  </simpleType> 
 
  <element name="minutes" type="gml:ArcMinutesType"/> 
 
  <simpleType name="ArcMinutesType"> 
    <restriction base="nonNegativeInteger"> 
      <maxInclusive value="59"/> 
    </restriction> 
  </simpleType> 
 
  <element name="seconds" type="gml:ArcSecondsType"/> 
 
  <simpleType name="ArcSecondsType"> 
    <restriction base="decimal"> 
      <minInclusive value="0.00"/> 
      <maxExclusive value="60.00"/> 
    </restriction> 
  </simpleType> 
 
In an instance document the element might appear in one of the following forms: 


<gml:dmsAngle> 
  <gml:degrees direction="S">35</gml:degrees> 
  <gml:minutes>45</gml:minutes> 
  <gml:seconds>21.98</gml:seconds> 
</gml:dmsAngle> 
 
<gml:dmsAngle> 
  <gml:degrees direction="S">35</gml:degrees> 
  <gml:decimalMinutes>45.43</gml:decimalMinutes> 
</gml:dmsAngle> 
 


16.3.5 gml:degrees 


The degrees element allows an integer number of degrees with identification of the angle direction. This 
element is intended to be used within geographic positions, and has an XML attribute direction that can take 
values  


"N" or "S" for Latitude, meaning North or South of the equator;  


"E" or "W" for Longitude, meaning East or West of the prime meridian;  


"+" or "-" for other angles, in the specified rotational direction from a specified reference direction. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 205 
 


 


16.3.6 gml:decimalMinutes 


Decimal number of arc-minutes for use within a degree-minute angular value. 


16.3.7 gml:minutes 


Integer number of arc-minutes for use within a degree-minute-second angular value. 


16.3.8 gml:seconds 


Number of arc-seconds for use within a degree-minute-second angular value. 


16.3.9 gml:AngleChoiceType 


To support the choice of either encoding for angles in a content model, a convenience type 
gml:AngleChoiceType is provided.   This element contains another element, either a angle or a dmsAngle.  It 
is declared in the schema as follows:   


  <complexType name="AngleChoiceType"> 
    <choice> 
      <element ref="gml:angle"/> 
      <element ref="gml:dmsAngle"/> 
    </choice> 
  </complexType> 
 
In an instance document an element of this type might appear: 


<my:angle> 
  <gml:angle uom="#gradians">95.</gml:simpleAngle> 
</my:angle> 
 
<my:angle> 
  <gml:dmsAngle> 
    <gml:degrees direction="S">35</gml:degrees> 
    <gml:decimalMinutes>45.43</gml:decimalMinutes> 
  </gml:dmsAngle> 
</my:angle> 
 


16.4 Value Objects schema 


16.4.1 Introduction 


The schema document valueObjects.xsd describing components for generic Values is listed in Annex C.  It is 
identified by the following location-independent name (using URN syntax): 


urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-xsd:valueObjects:v3.0 
 


The elements declared in valueObjects.xsd build on elements and types from other GML schemas, in 
particular _TimeObject from temporal.xsd, _Geometry from geometryBasic0d1d.xsd, and the following types 
from basicTypes.xsd:  MeasureType, MeasureListType, CodeType, CodeOrNullListType, 
BooleanOrNullListType, IntegerOrNullList.   


Of particular interest are elements declared in valueObjects.xsd that are the heads of substitution groups, and 
one named choice group. These are the primary reason for the value objects schema, since they can act as 
variables in the definition of content models, such as Observations, when it is desired to permit alternative 
value types to occur some of which may have complex content such as arrays, geometry and time objects, 
and where it is useful not to prescribe the actual value type in advance. The members of the groups include 
quantities, category classifications, Boolean, count, temporal and spatial values, and aggregates of these.   







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


206  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


NOTE The elements declared in this schema are used for direct representation of values.  Their content models 
are in general not derived from gml:AbstractGMLType and they do not carry an identifier.   


16.4.2 Value element hierarchy 


The component hierarchy is illustrated in the following UML class diagram.  UML generalization relationships 
are used to indicate XML Schema substitution group and choice group membership.  UML composition 
relationships are used to indicate membership in an XML Schema type content model.   


 


Figure 16.4.1 Substitution groups and composition relationships in the value schema 


The following relationships are defined in the valueObjects.xsd schema: 


 Concrete elements Quantity, Category, Count and Boolean are substitutable for the abstract element 
_ScalarValue.   


 Concrete elements QuantityList, CategoryList, CountList and BooleanList are substitutable for the 
abstract element _ScalarValueList.   


 Concrete element ValueArray is substitutable for the concrete element CompositeValue.   


 Abstract elements _ScalarValue and _ScalarValueList, and concrete elements CompositeValue, 
ValueExtent, CategoryExtent, CountExtent and QuantityExtent are substitutable for abstract element 
_Value.   


 Abstract elements _Value, _TimeObject (from temporal.xsd) and _Geometry (from 
geometryBasic0d1d.xsd), and concrete element Null (from gmlBase.xsd) are all in a choice group 
named Value, which is used for compositing in CompositeValue and ValueExtent.   


 Schemas which need values may use the abstract element _Value in a content model in order to 
permit any of the _ScalarValues, _ScalarValueLists, CompositeValue or ValueExtent to occur in an 
instance, or the named group Value to also permit TimeObjects, Geometrys, and Nulls.   


16.4.3 gml:Boolean, gml:BooleanList 


For recording a value or list of values from two-valued logic, using the XML Schema boolean type.  These 
elements use the following schema declarations:   







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 207 
 


 


<element name="Boolean" type="boolean" substitutionGroup="gml:_ScalarValue"/> 
 
<element name="BooleanList" type="gml:booleanOrNullList" substitutionGroup="gml:_ScalarValueList"/> 
 
These elements are described in clause 7.3.4.1.   


In an instance the following examples may be found:   


<gml:Boolean>1</gml:Boolean> 
 
<gml:Boolean>false</gml:Boolean> 
 
<gml:BooleanList>1 missing  0 1 1 http://my.big.org/explanations/theDogAteIt 0 1</gml:BooleanList> 
 
These examples illustrate the use of the various Boolean values {1, 0, true, false} and also the fact that null 
values such as missing or a URI can be embedded within a list.   


16.4.4 gml:Category, gml:CategoryList 


For recording terms representing a classification.  These elements use the following schema declarations:   


<element name="Category" type="gml:CodeType" substitutionGroup="gml:_ScalarValue"/> 
 
<element name="CategoryList" type="gml:CodeOrNullListType" substitutionGroup="gml:_ScalarValueList"/> 
 
A Category has an optional XML attribute codeSpace, whose value is a URI which identifies a dictionary, 
codelist or authority for the term.  In an instance the following examples may be found:   


<gml:Category>good</gml:Category> 
 
<gml:Category codeSpace="http://my.big.org/dictionaries/rocktypes">Syenite</gml:Category> 
 
<gml:CategoryList codeSpace="http://my.big.org/dictionaries/rocktypes">Syenite Granite missing Tuff</gml:CategoryList> 
 
<gml:CategoryList codeSpace=http://my.big.org/species>bettong numbat phasogale wallaby possum</ 
gml:CategoryList>  
 


16.4.5 gml:Count, gml:CountList 


For recording integers representing a rate of occurrence.  These elements use the following schema 
declarations:   


<element name="Count" type="integer" substitutionGroup="gml:_ScalarValue"/> 
 
<element name="CountList" type="gml:integerOrNullList" substitutionGroup="gml:_ScalarValueList"/> 
 
In an instance the following examples may be found:   


<gml:Count>513</gml:Count> 
 
<gml:CountList>34 56 2 inappplicable 153</gml:CountList> 
 


16.4.6 gml:Quantity, gml:QuantityList 


For recording numeric values with a scale.  The content of the element is an amount using the XML Schema 
type double which permits decimal or scientific notation.  These elements use the following schema 
declarations:   


<element name="Quantity" type="gml:MeasureType" substitutionGroup="gml:_ScalarValue"/> 
 
<element name="QuantityList" type="gml:MeasureOrNullListType" substitutionGroup="gml:_ScalarValueList"/> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


208  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 
An XML attribute uom (unit of measure) is required, whose value is a URI which identifies the definition of a 
ratio scale or units by which the numeric value shall be multiplied, or an interval or position scale on which the 
value occurs.  In an instance the following examples may be found:   


<gml:Quantity uom="#m">4.32e-4</gml:Quantity> 
 
<gml:QuantityList uom="#C">21. 37. withheld 25.</gml:QuantityList> 
 


16.4.7 gml:_Value, gml:_ScalarValue, gml:_ScalarValueList 


Value is an abstract element which acts as the head of a substitution group which contains _ScalarValue, 
_ScalarValueList, CompositeValue and ValueExtent, and (transitively) the elements in their substitution 
groups.   


ScalarValue is an abstract element which acts as the head of a substitution group which contains Boolean, 
Category, Count and Quantity, and (transitively) the elements in their substitution groups.   


ScalarValueList is an abstract element which acts as the head of a substitution group which contains 
BooleanList, CategoryList, CountList and QuantityList, and (transitively) the elements in their substitution 
groups.   


These elements use the following schema declarations:   


<element name="_Value" abstract="true" substitutionGroup="gml:_Object"> 
<element name="_ScalarValue" abstract="true" substitutionGroup="gml:_Value"/> 
<element name="_ScalarValueList" abstract="true" substitutionGroup="gml:_Value"/> 
 
These elements may be used in an application schema as variables, so that in an XML instance document 
any member of its substitution group may occur. 


16.4.8 gml:Value 


This is a convenience choice group which unifies generic Values defined in this schema document with 
Geometry and Temporal objects and the Measures described above, so that any of these may be used within 
aggregate Values.  This element uses the following schema declaration:   


  <group name="Value"> 
    <choice> 
      <element ref="gml:_Value"/> 
      <element ref="gml:_Geometry"/> 
      <element ref="gml:_TimeObject"/> 
      <element ref="gml:Null"/> 
      <element ref="gml:measure"/> 
    </choice> 
  </group> 
 


16.4.9 gml:valueProperty, gml:valueComponent, gml:valueComponents 


Elements that instantiates a GML property which refers to, or contains, a Value or Values.  These elements 
use the following schema declarations:   


<element name="valueProperty" type="gml:ValuePropertyType"/> 
 
<element name="valueComponent" type="gml:ValuePropertyType"/> 
 
  <complexType name="ValuePropertyType"> 
    <sequence minOccurs="0"> 
      <group ref="gml:Value"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
  </complexType> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 209 
 


 


 
  <element name="valueComponents" type="gml:ValueArrayPropertyType"/> 
 
  <complexType name="ValueArrayPropertyType"> 
    <sequence> 
      <group ref="gml:Value" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
    </sequence> 
  </complexType> 
 
Note that both ValuePropertyType and ValueArrayPropertyType have the group named Value as their 
content.  This means that any of the elements in the Value choice group, or in the substitution groups of the 
members of the choice group can occur as the content of a valueProperty.   


The valueProperty element is a convenience element for general use.  The valueComponent and 
valueComponents elements are specifically used in compositing.   


16.4.10 gml:CompositeValue 


CompositeValue is an aggregate value built from other Values using the Composite pattern. It contains zero or 
an arbitrary number of valueComponent elements, and zero or one valueComponents elements.  It may be 
used for strongly coupled aggregates (vectors, tensors) or for arbitrary collections of values.  This element 
uses the following schema declarations: 


  <element name="CompositeValue" type="gml:CompositeValueType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Value"/> 
 
  <complexType name="CompositeValueType"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <extension base="gml:AbstractGMLType"> 
        <sequence> 
          <element ref="gml:valueComponent" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
          <element ref="gml:valueComponents" minOccurs="0"/> 
        </sequence> 
      </extension> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
In an instance a CompositeValue may appear as in the following examples: 


<gml:CompositeValue> 
  <gml:valueComponent> 
    <gml:QuantityList uom="#C">21. 37. withheld 25.</gml:QuantityList> 
  </gml:valueComponent> 
  <gml:valueComponent> 
    <gml:Category>good</gml:Category> 
  </gml:valueComponent> 
  <gml:valueComponent> 
    <gml:Null>template</gml:Null> 
  </gml:valueComponent> 
  <gml:valueComponents> 
    <gml:Point srsName="urn:EPSG:geographicCRS:4326"><gml:pos>171. -32.</gml:pos></gml:Point> 
    <gml:Point srsName="urn:EPSG:geographicCRS:4326"><gml:pos>170. -35.</gml:pos></gml:Point> 
    <gml:Point srsName="urn:EPSG:geographicCRS:4326"><gml:pos>174. -37.</gml:pos></gml:Point> 
  </gml:valueComponents> 
</gml:CompositeValue> 
 
<gml:CompositeValue> 
  <gml:valueComponents> 
    <gml:Point srsName="urn:EPSG:geographicCRS:4326"><gml:pos>-67.563 -13.834</gml:pos></gml:Point> 
    <gml:Quantity uom="#km">632.</gml:Quantity> 
    <gml:TimeInstant><gml:timePosition>1994-06-09T00:33:16.4</gml:timePosition></gml:TimeInstant> 
    <gml:Quantity uom="#mom">-1.00</gml:Quantity> 
    <gml:Quantity uom="#mom">0.92</gml:Quantity> 
    <gml:Quantity uom="#mom">0.09</gml:Quantity> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


210  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


    <gml:Quantity uom="#mom">-1.69</gml:Quantity 
    <gml:Quantity uom="#mom">-0.09</gml:Quantity> 
    <gml:Quantity uom="#mom">-0.37</gml:Quantity> 
  </gml:valueComponents> 
</gml:CompositeValue> 
 


16.4.11 gml:ValueArray 


A Value Array is used for homogeneous arrays of primitive and aggregate values.   


The member values may be scalars, composites, arrays or lists.  This element uses the following schema 
declarations: 


  <element name="ValueArray" type="gml:ValueArrayType" substitutionGroup="gml:CompositeValue"> 
    <annotation> 
      <appinfo> 
        <sch:pattern name="Check either codeSpace or uom not both"> 
          <sch:rule context="gml:ValueArray"> 
            <sch:report test="@codeSpace and @uom">ValueArray may not carry both a reference to a codeSpace and a 
uom</sch:report> 
          </sch:rule> 
        </sch:pattern> 
        <sch:pattern name="Check components are homogeneous"> 
          <sch:rule context="gml:ValueArray"> 
            <sch:assert test="count(gml:valueComponent/*) = count(gml:valueComponent/*[name() = 
name(../../gml:valueComponent[1]/*[1])])">All components of <sch:name/> shall be of the same type</sch:assert> 
            <sch:assert test="count(gml:valueComponents/*) = count(gml:valueComponents/*[name() = name(../*[1])])">All 
components of <sch:name/> shall be of the same type</sch:assert> 
          </sch:rule> 
        </sch:pattern> 
      </appinfo> 
    </annotation> 
  </element> 
 
  <complexType name="ValueArrayType"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <extension base="gml:CompositeValueType"> 
        <attributeGroup ref="gml:referenceSystem"/> 
      </extension> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
  <attributeGroup name="referenceSystem"> 
    <attribute name="codeSpace" type="anyURI" use="optional"/> 
    <attribute name="uom" type="anyURI" use="optional"/> 
  </attributeGroup> 
 
ValueArray has the same content model as CompositeValue, but the member values shall be homogeneous.  
The element declaration contains a Schematron constraint which expresses this restriction precisely.  Since 
the members are homogeneous, the referenceSystem (uom, codeSpace) may be specified on the 
ValueArray itself and inherited by all the members if desired. 


The ValueArray element may appear in instances as follows.   


In the first example a set of Points are each the value of a valueComponent property.  One of the values is 
provided by-reference, using the standard xlink:href syntax:  


<gml:ValueArray> 
  <gml:valueComponent> 
    <gml:Point srsName="urn:EPSG:geographicCRS:63266405"> 
      <gml:pos>-32. 171.</gml:pos> 
    </gml:Point> 
  </gml:valueComponent> 
  <gml:valueComponent> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 211 
 


 


    <gml:Point srsName="urn:EPSG:geographicCRS: 63266405"> 
      <gml:pos>-35. 170.</gml:pos> 
    </gml:Point> 
  </gml:valueComponent> 
  <gml:valueComponent xlink:href="http://my.big.org/locations/points/point456"/> 
</gml:ValueArray> 
 
In the second example a set of Quantities are contained within a valueComponents property.  One of the 
values is not available, indicated by a Null:  


<gml:ValueArray> 
  <gml:valueComponents> 
    <gml:Quantity uom="#C">21.</gml:Quantity> 
    <gml:Quantity uom="#C">37.</gml:Quantity> 
    <gml:Null>missing</gml:Null> 
  </gml:valueComponents> 
</gml:ValueArray> 
 
Note that a_ScalarValueList is usually preferred for arrays of Scalar Values since this is a more efficient 
encoding.  The information in the previous example can be expressed: 


<gml:QuantityList uom="#C">21. 37. missing</gml:QuantityList> 
 
However, if the values of the components are not scalars, then the explicit form is required.   


 


16.4.12  Typed ValueExtents: gml:CategoryExtent, gml:CountExtent, gml:QuantityExtent 


Three elements are provided for typed value extents, for categories, counts and quantities.  Their content 
models are defined by restricting the relevant scalar list types to contain exactly two items as follows: 


<element name="CategoryExtent" type="gml:CategoryExtentType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Value"/> 
 
  <complexType name="CategoryExtentType"> 
    <simpleContent> 
      <restriction base="gml:CodeOrNullListType"> 
        <length value="2"/> 
      </restriction> 
    </simpleContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
  <element name="CountExtent" type="gml:CountExtentType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Value"/> 
 
  <simpleType name="CountExtentType"> 
    <restriction base="gml:integerOrNullList"> 
      <length value="2"/> 
    </restriction> 
  </simpleType> 
 
  <element name="QuantityExtent" type="gml:QuantityExtentType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Value"/> 
 
  <complexType name="QuantityExtentType"> 
    <simpleContent> 
      <restriction base="gml:MeasureOrNullListType"> 
        <length value="2"/> 
      </restriction> 
    </simpleContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
A gml:QuantityExtent element or another element using this type will contain two values and a scale as 
follows: 


<gml:QuantityExtent uom=#mm>0. 9.5</gml:QuantityExtent> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


212  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 
An element of gml:CategoryExtentType is useful if the codeSpace defines a set of ordered terms, for example: 


<my:AgeRange codeSpace=http://iugg.org/geologicalTimePeriods>Cambrian Devonian</my:AgeRange> 
 
Any value extent may describe a single-ended interval by using a Null value for one of the limits, for example: 


<gml:CountExtent>53 inapplicable</gml:CountExtent> 
 
describes the integers starting with 53.   


16.4.13 gml:BooleanPropertyType, gml:CategoryPropertyType, gml:CountPropertyType, 
gml:QuantityPropertyType 


A set of convenience types are provided for properties whose content is a specific member of the 
gml:_ScalarValue substitution group.  Their definitions follow the same pattern, as exemplified by the definition 
of gml:BooleanPropertyType: 


  <complexType name="BooleanPropertyType"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <restriction base="gml:ValuePropertyType"> 
        <sequence > 
          <element ref="gml:Boolean" minOccurs="0"/> 
        </sequence> 
      </restriction> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 


17 GML schemas  directions 


17.1 Direction schema 


The direction schema, direction.xsd provides the GML Application Schema developer with a standard property 
element to describe direction, and associated objects that can be used to express orientation, direction, 
heading, bearing or other directional aspects of geographic features.  The schema is listed in Annex C.  It is 
identified by the following location-independent name (using URN syntax): 


urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-xsd:direction:v3.1.0 
 


17.1.1 gml:direction, gml:DirectionPropertyType  


The property gml:direction is intended as a property to be assigned to features defined in a GML application 
schema.  It is declared in the schema as follows: 


  <element name="direction" type="gml:DirectionPropertyType"/> 
 
  <complexType name="DirectionPropertyType"> 
    <annotation> 
      <documentation/> 
    </annotation> 
    <choice> 
      <element ref="gml:DirectionVector"/> 
      <element ref="gml:CompassPoint"/> 
      <element name="DirectionKeyword" type="gml:CodeType"/> 
      <element name="DirectionString" type="gml:StringOrRefType"/> 
    </choice> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
  </complexType> 
 


The various kinds of direction specifications follow. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 213 
 


 


17.1.2 gml:DirectionVector, gml:DirectionVectorType  


Director vectors are specified by providing components of a vector or two angles as follows: 


  <element name="DirectionVector" type="gml:DirectionVectorType"/> 
 
  <complexType name="DirectionVectorType"> 
    <choice> 
      <element ref="gml:vector"/> 
      <sequence> 
        <element name="horizontalAngle" type="gml:AngleType"/> 
        <element name="verticalAngle" type="gml:AngleType"/> 
      </sequence> 
    </choice> 
  </complexType> 
 
The gml:vector element is described in clause 9.1.4.1. This form may appear in an data instance as follows: 


<gml:direction> 
  <gml:DirectionVector> 
    <gml:horizontalAngle uom="#degreesEastOfNorth">45.0</gml:horizontalAngle> 
    <gml:verticalAngle uom="#degreesDown">0.0</gml:verticalAngle> 
  </gml:DirectionVector> 
</gml:direction> 
 
Angles are specified via gml:AngleType whose content model is defined in clause 16.3.3.  This form may 
appear in an data instance as follows: 


 
<gml:direction> 
  <gml:DirectionVector> 
    <gml:horizontalAngle uom="#degreesEastOfNorth">45.0</gml:horizontalAngle> 
    <gml:verticalAngle uom="#degreesDown">0.0</gml:verticalAngle> 
  </gml:DirectionVector> 
</gml:direction> 
 


17.1.3 gml:CompassPoint, gml:CompassPointEnumeration  


A compass point is specified by a simple enumeration string type.  The gml:CompassPoint element is 
declared in the schema as follows: 


  <element name="CompassPoint" type="gml:CompassPointEnumeration"/> 
 
  <simpleType name="CompassPointEnumeration"> 
    <restriction base="string"> 
      <enumeration value="N"/> 
      <enumeration value="NNE"/> 
      <enumeration value="NE"/> 
      <enumeration value="ENE"/> 
      <enumeration value="E"/> 
      <enumeration value="ESE"/> 
      <enumeration value="SE"/> 
      <enumeration value="SSE"/> 
      <enumeration value="S"/> 
      <enumeration value="SSW"/> 
      <enumeration value="SW"/> 
      <enumeration value="WSW"/> 
      <enumeration value="W"/> 
      <enumeration value="WNW"/> 
      <enumeration value="NW"/> 
      <enumeration value="NNW"/> 
    </restriction> 
  </simpleType> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


214  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 
These directions are necessarily approximate, giving direction with a precision of 22.5.  It is thus generally 
unnecessary to specify the reference frame, though this may be detailed in the definition of a GML application 
language.  


This form may appear in an data instance as follows: 


<gml:direction> 
  <gml:CompassPoint>WNW</gml:CompassPoint> 
</gml:direction> 
 


17.1.4 Text Based Directions: gml:DirectionKeyword, gml:DirectionString 


Two elements to contain text-based descriptions of direction are provided.   


If the direction is specified using a term from a list, gml:KeyWord should be used, and the list indicated using 
the value of the codeSpce attribute.  This form may appear in an data instance as follows: 


<gml:direction> 
  <gml:DirectionKeyword codeSpace="http://my.big.org/terms/direction">onshore</gml:DirectionKeyword> 
</gml:direction> 
 
If the direction is decribed in prose, gml:DirectionString should be used, allowing the value to be included 
inline or by reference.  This form may appear in an data instance as follows: 


<gml:direction> 
  <gml:DirectionString>Towards the lighthouse</gml:DirectionString> 
</gml:direction> 
 
<gml:direction> 
  <gml:DirectionString xlink:href="http://my.big.org/logbook/20021127/paragraph6"/> 
</gml:direction> 
 


18 GML schemas  observations 


18.1 Observations 


A GML observation models the act of observing, often with a camera, a person or some form of instrument.  
An observation feature describes the metadata associated with an information capture event, together with 
with a value for the result of the observation.  This covers a broad range of cases, from a tourist photo (not the 
photo but the act of taking the photo), to images acquired by space borne sensors or the measurement of a 
temperature 5 meters below the surfaces of a Lake. See also Clause 7.9. (measures.xsd). 


The basic structures introduced in this schema are intended to serve as the foundation for more 
comprehensive schemas for scientific, technical and engineering measurement schemas. 


18.2 Observation schema 


Observations are described in the schema, observations.xsd.  The schema is listed in Annex C.  It is identified 
by the following location-independent name (using URN syntax): 


urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-xsd:observation:v3.1.0 
 
This schema describes two kinds of observations, gml:Observation and gml:DirectedObservation.  


18.2.1 gml:Observation 


The gml:Observation element is declared in the schema as follows: 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 215 
 


 


  <element name="Observation" type="gml:ObservationType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Feature"/> 
 
  <complexType name="ObservationType"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <extension base="gml:AbstractFeatureType"> 
        <sequence> 
          <element ref="gml:validTime"/> 
          <element ref="gml:using" minOccurs="0"/> 
          <element ref="gml:target" minOccurs="0"/> 
          <element ref="gml:resultOf"/> 
        </sequence> 
      </extension> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
The content model is a straightforward extension of gml:AbstractFeatureType it automatically has 
gml:metadataProperty, gml:description, gml:name, gml:location and gml:boundedBy properties.  


The gml:validTime element is declared in clause 14.2.2.3.  In this context it describes the time of the 
observation.  Note that this can be a time instant or a time period. 


18.2.2 gml:using 


The gml:using property contains or points to a description of a sensor, instrument or procedure used for the 
observation.  It is declared in the schema as follows: 


  <element name="using" type="gml:FeaturePropertyType"/> 
 


18.2.3 gml:target 


The gml:target property contains or points to the specimen, region or station which is the object of the 
observation.  This property element is declared in the schema as follows: 


  <element name="target" type="gml:TargetPropertyType"/> 
 
  <element name="subject" type="gml:TargetPropertyType" substitutionGroup="gml:target"> 
 
  <complexType name="TargetPropertyType"> 
    <annotation> 
      <documentation>Container for an object representing the target or subject of an observation.</documentation> 
    </annotation> 
    <choice minOccurs="0"> 
      <element ref="gml:_Feature"/> 
      <element ref="gml:_Geometry"/> 
    </choice> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
  </complexType> 
 
This property is particularly useful for remote observations, such as photographs, where the gml:location 
property might apply to the location of the camera or the location of the field of view, and thus may be 
ambiguous.   


The subject element is provided as a convenient synonym for target.  This is the term commonly used in 
phtotography.   







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


216  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


18.2.4 gml:resultOf 


The gml:resultOf property indicates the result of the observation.  Following the standard GML property 
pattern (clause ), the value may be inline, or a reference to a value elsewhere.  If the value is inline, it must be 
a member of the gml:_Object substitution group.  It is declared in the schema as follows: 


  <element name="resultOf" type="gml:AssociationType"/> 
 


18.3 Examples  


18.3.1 gml:Observation 


Some examples of simple observations are as follows: 


<gml:Observation> 
  <gml:location xlink:href="http://www.environment.org/stations/l456"/> 
  <gml:validTime> 
    <gml:TimeInstant> 
      <gml:timePosition>2002-11-12T09:12:00</gml:timePosition> 
    </gml:TimeInstant> 
  </gml:validTime> 
  <gml:using xlink:href="http://www.my.org/sensors/thermometer4"/> 
  <gml:target xlink:href="http://www.environment.org/stations/l456"/> 
  <gml:resultOf> 
    <gml:Quantity uom="#C">18.4</gml:Quantity> 
  </gml:resultOf> 
</gml:Observation> 
 
<gml:Observation> 
  <gml:location xlink:href="http://www.tourist.org/lookouts/platform4"/> 
  <gml:validTime> 
    <gml:TimeInstant> 
      <gml:timePosition>2002-11-12T09:12:00</gml:timePosition> 
    </gml:TimeInstant> 
  </gml:validTime> 
  <gml:using xlink:href="http://www.my.org/cameras/leica2"/> 
  <gml:subject xlink:href="http://www.tourist.org/sights/mountain3"/> 
  <gml:resultOf xlink:href="http://www.my.org/photos/landscape1.jpg"/> 
</gml:Observation> 
 
<gml:Observation> 
  <gml:location> 
    <gml:LocationString>Home</gml:LocationString> 
  </gml:location> 
  <gml:validTime> 
    <gml:TimeInstant> 
      <gml:timePosition>2002-10-25T11:37:25</gml:timePosition> 
    </gml:TimeInstant> 
  </gml:validTime> 
  <gml:subject xlink:href="http://www.people.org/kids/abby"/> 
  <gml:resultOf xlink:href="myDaughtersPortrait.jpg"/> 
</gml:Observation> 
 


18.3.2 gml:DirectedObservation 


A DirectedObservation is the same as an observation except that it adds an additional direction property. This 
is the direction in which the observation was acquired. Clearly this applies only to certain types of 
observations such as visual observations by people, or observations obtained from terrestrial cameras.   


  <element name="DirectedObservation" type="gml:DirectedObservationType"  
      substitutionGroup="gml: Observation"/> 
 
  <complexType name="DirectedObservationType"> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 217 
 


 


    <complexContent> 
      <extension base="gml:ObservationType"> 
        <sequence> 
          <element ref="gml:direction"/> 
        </sequence> 
      </extension> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
EXAMPLE DirectedObservation: 


<gml:DirectedObservation> 
  <gml:validTime> 
    <gml:TimeInstant> 
      <gml:timePosition>2002-11-12T09:12:00</gml:timePosition> 
    </gml:TimeInstant> 
  </gml:validTime> 
 <gml:using xlink:href="http://www.my.org/cameras/leica2"/> 
  <gml:target xlink:href="http://www.tourist.org/sights/mountain3"/> 
 <gml:resultOf xlink:href="http://www.my.org/photos/landscape1.jpg"/> 
  <gml:direction> 
    <gml:CompassPoint>NW</gml:CompassPoint> 
  </gml:direction> 
</gml:DirectedObservation> 
 


18.3.3 gml:DirectedObservationAtDistance 


A DirectedObservationAtDistance adds an additional distance property. This is the distance from the observer 
to the subject of the observation. Clearly this applies only to certain types of observations such as visual 
observations by people, or observations obtained from terrestrial cameras.   


  <element name="DirectedObservationAtDistance" type="gml:DirectedObservationAtDistanceType"  
      substitutionGroup="gml: DirectedObservation "/> 
 
  <complexType name="DirectedObservationAtDistanceType"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <extension base="gml:DirectedObservationType"> 
        <sequence> 
          <element name="distance" type="gml:MeasureType"/> 
        </sequence> 
      </extension> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
EXAMPLE DirectedObservationAtDistance: 


<gml:DirectedObservationAtDistance> 
  <gml:validTime> 
    <gml:TimeInstant> 
      <gml:timePosition>2002-11-12T09:12:00</gml:timePosition> 
    </gml:TimeInstant> 
  </gml:validTime> 
 <gml:using xlink:href="http://www.my.org/cameras/leica2"/> 
  <gml:subject xlink:href="http://www.tourist.org/sights/mountain3"/> 
 <gml:resultOf xlink:href="http://www.my.org/photos/landscape1.jpg"/> 
  <gml:direction> 
    <gml:CompassPoint>NW</gml:CompassPoint> 
  </gml:direction> 
  <gml:distance uom="#m">16500.</gml:distance> 
</gml:DirectedObservationAtDistance> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


218  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


19 GML schemas  coverages 


19.1 The coverage model and representations 


19.1.1 General Remarks 


This clause defines the GML encoding for coverages and is in agreement with the conceptual model outlined 
in ISO 19123 and in the OGC Abstract Specification, Topic 6.   


ISO 19123 provides a definition: 


Coverages support mapping from a spatiotemporal domain to attribute values where attribute types are 
common to all geographic positions within the spatiotemporal domain. A spatiotemporal domain consists 
of a collection of direct positions in a coordinate space. Examples of coverages include rasters, 
triangulated irregular networks, point coverages, and polygon coverages. Coverages are the prevailing 
data structures in a number of application areas, such as remote sensing, meteorology, and bathymetric, 
elevation, soil, and vegetation mapping. 


The information describing a coverage is conventionally represented in one of two ways: 


a. As a set of discrete location-value pairs.   


b. As a description of the spatio-temporal domain (multi-geometry, grid) and a description of the 
set of values from the range, together with a method or rule (which may be implicit) that 
assigns a value from the range set to each position within the domain.  


The first method only applies to domains that are partitioned into discrete components.  This representation 
may be realised in GML as a homogeneous feature collection (i.e. all the features have the same set of 
properties), where the set of locations from the features compose the domain (remember: gml:location may 
refer to any geometry, not just points), and the set of property values compose the range.  The mapping from 
domain to range is trivial: the properties on each feature are assigned to the location of that feature.  For 
coverages whose domain is composed of a large set of locations this explicit representation may, however, be 
bulky.  


The second method is more flexible in a number of ways.   


a) Since the domain and range are homogeneous sets, there may be efficiences in the representation of 
either or both domain and range 


b) The values in the range may be represented in analytic form rather than as discrete explicit values, 
which is also related to the fact that 


c) When the attribute values vary continuously across the domain, a functional form covering the 
complete domain is required to be able to provide values of the range at arbitrary locations.  The 
function typically involves interpolation, possibly using a process model.   


The first representation is typically used during data collection where a set or properties relating to a single 
location are managed together, or update of a datastore where only a small number of features are 
manipulated at one time.  The second representation is more suitable for analysis, where spatio-temporal 
patterns and anomalies within a specific property are of interest.   


It is the second method, using a functional map over the whole domain, that is the subject of the GML 
coverage encoding.   


19.1.2 Formal description of a coverage 


A coverage incorporates a mapping from a spatiotemporal domain to a range set, the latter providing the set 
in which the attribute values live.  The range set can be an arbitrary set including discrete lists, integer or 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 219 
 


 


floating point ranges, and multi-dimensional vector spaces.  This conceptual model of a coverage is described 
in Figure 4. 


 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Figure 4  Conceptual Model of a Coverage 


A coverage can be viewed as the graph of the coverage function f:A  B, that is as the set of ordered pairs 


{(x, f(x)) | where x is in A} 


This view is especially applicable to the GML encoding of a coverage.  In the case of a discrete coverage, the 
domain set A is partitioned into a collection of subsets (typically a disjoint collection) A = UAi and the function f 
is constant on each Ai.  For a spatial domain, the Ai are geometry elements, hence the coverage can be 
viewed as a collection of (geometry,value) pairs, where the value is an element of the range set.  If the spatial 
domain A is a topological space then the coverage can be viewed as a collection of (topology,value) pairs, 
where the topology element in the pair is a topological n-chain (in GML terms this is a gml:TopoPoint, 
gml:TopoCurve, gml:TopoSurface or gml:TopoSolid).  


19.1.3 Coverage in GML 


A coverage is implemented as a GML feature. We can thus speak of a temperature distribution feature, or a 
remotely sensed image feature, or a soil distribution feature. 


As is the case for any GML object, a coverage object may also be the value of a property of a feature.  For 
example, the temperature distribution might be a property of a city feature, so a description of the city of 
Ottawa might be represented in GML as: 


 


<abc:City gml:id = Ottawa> 
  <abc:population>500000</abc:population> 
  <abc:temperatureDistribution> 
   <abc:TemperatureCoverage>  </abc:TemperatureCoverage> 
  </abc:temperatureDistribution> 
</abc:City> 
 


Coverages in GML 3 are supported by two schemas,  


 coverage.xsd  


 grids.xsd.   


Coverages.xsd provides the basic GML 3 coverage model.  Grids.xsd provides grid geometry structures that 
are used in the description of gridded coverages but which could be employed for other applications. 


Future releases of GML will provide other geometries and temporal complexes for use in coverages. 


Domain 


(space, time) 


Range 


(attribute values) 
f 


A 
B 


feature 


feature (coverage) 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


220  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


19.2 Grids schema 


An implicit description of geometry is one in which the items of the geometry do not explicitly appear in the 
encoding.  Instead, a compact notation records a set of parameters, and a set of objects may be generated 
using a rule with these parameters.   


The schema grids.xsd provides some grid geometries that are used in the description of gridded coverages 
and other applications.  The schema is listed in Annex C.  It is identified by the following location-independent 
name (using URN syntax): 


urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-xsd:grids:v3.1.0 
 


In GML 3 two grid structures are defined, namely gml:Grid and gml:RectifiedGrid. 


19.2.1  Unrectified Grid (gml:Grid) 


The gml:Grid element is defined in the schema as follows: 


<element name="Grid" type="gml:GridType" substitutionGroup="gml:_ImplicitGeometry"/> 
 
  <complexType name="GridType"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <extension base="gml:AbstractGeometryType"> 
        <sequence> 
          <element name="limits" type="gml:GridLimitsType"/> 
          <element name="axisName" type="string" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
        </sequence> 
      </extension> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
The gml:Grid implicitly defines an unrectified grid, which is a network composed of two or more sets of equally 
spaced parallel lines in which the members of each set intersect each other.  The region of interest within the 
grid is given in terms of its limits, being the grid coordinates of  diagonally opposed corners of a rectangular 
region.  An axisName is provided for each of the axes of the grid.  The standard SRSReferenceGroup is 
inherited from gml:AbstractGeometryType.  This includes the dimension attribute.   


In GML3 the limits element contains a single GridEnvelope, according to the following schema definitions: 


  <complexType name="GridLimitsType"> 
    <sequence> 
      <element name="GridEnvelope" type="gml:GridEnvelopeType"/> 
    </sequence> 
  </complexType> 
 
  <complexType name="GridEnvelopeType"> 
    <sequence> 
      <element name="low" type="gml:integerList"/> 
      <element name="high" type="gml:integerList"/> 
    </sequence> 
  </complexType> 
 
The low and high elements are each integerLists, which are coordinate tuples, the coordinates being 
measured as offsets from the origin of the grid along each axis, of the diagonally opposing corners of a 
rectangular region of interest.   


The following example illustrates a simple Grid. 


    <gml:Grid dimension="2"> 
      <gml:limits> 
        <gml:GridEnvelope> 
          <gml:low>0 0</gml:low> 
          <gml:high>3 3</gml:high> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 221 
 


 


        </gml:GridEnvelope> 
      </gml:limits> 
      <gml:axisName>x</gml:axisName> 
      <gml:axisName>y</gml:axisName> 
    </gml:Grid> 
 
In this example the Grid has posts (points) at locations (0,0), (0,1),(1,0),(1,1) through to (4,4). 


19.2.2 Rectified Grid (gml:RectifiedGrid) 


A rectified grid is a kind of grid in which the points of the grid have geometric locations.  It is defined by 
specifying the position (in some geometric space) of the grid origin and of the vectors that specify the post 
locations. The RectifiedGrid element is declared in the schema as follows: 


<element name="RectifiedGrid" type="gml:RectifiedGridType" substitutionGroup="gml:Grid"/> 
 
  <complexType name="RectifiedGridType"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <extension base="gml:GridType"> 
        <sequence> 
          <element name="origin" type="gml:PointPropertyType"/> 
          <element name="offsetVector" type="gml:VectorType" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
        </sequence> 
      </extension> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
Note that the grid limits (post indexes) and axis name properties are inherited from the gml:GridType and that 
the gml:RectifiedGrid adds an origin (contains a gml:Point) and a set of offset vectors specified using 
gml:VectorType as described in clause 9.1.4.1.    


Figure 5 shows the geometry of the RectifiedGrid. 


O 


Offset Vectors 


Origin  Point O 
 
OffSet Vectors p1, p2 


p1 
p2 


 


Figure 5  RectifiedGrid Geometry 
 


An example RectifiedGrid is as follows: 


    <gml:RectifiedGrid dimension="2"> 
        <gml:limits> 
          <gml:GridEnvelope> 
            <gml:low>1 1</gml:low> 
            <gml:high>3 3</gml:high> 
          </gml:GridEnvelope> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


222  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


        </gml:limits> 
        <gml:axisName>u</gml:axisName> 
        <gml:axisName>v</gml:axisName> 
        <gml:origin> 
          <gml:Point gml:id="palindrome" srsName="urn:EPSG:geographicCRS:4327"> 
            <gml:pos>1.2 3.3 2.1</gml:pos> 
          </gml:Point> 
        </gml:origin> 
        <gml:offsetVector srsName="urn:EPSG:geographicCRS:4327">1.1 2.2 3.3</gml:offsetVector> 
        <gml:offsetVector srsName="urn:EPSG:geographicCRS:4327">2.0 1.0 0.0</gml:offsetVector> 
      </gml:RectifiedGrid>   
 


Note that in this example the RectifiedGrid starts at integer offset 1 1 (value of low property) relative to the 
origin as shown in Figure 6. 


 


 


 


 


 


 


Figure 6  RectifiedGrid with non-zero low limit 


 


19.3 Coverage schema 


The coverage.xsd schema is listed in Annex C.  It is identified by the following location-independent name 
(using URN syntax): 


urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-xsd:coverage:v3.1.0 
 


19.3.1 gml:AbstractCoverageType, gml:_Coverage 


The base type for coverages is AbstractCoverageType, defined in the schema as follows:   


  <complexType name="AbstractCoverageType" abstract="true"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <extension base="gml:BoundedFeatureType"> 
        <sequence> 
          <element ref="gml:domainSet"/> 
          <element ref="gml:rangeSet"/> 
        </sequence> 
      </extension> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
NOTE gml:AbstractCoverageType is derived by extension from BoundedFeatureType, so any coverage whose 
content model is derived from this type is a GML feature, and the boundedBy property is mandatory on all coverages.   


The basic elements of a coverage can be seen in this content model: the coverage contains domainSet and 
rangeSet properties.  The gml:domainSet property describes the domain of the coverage and the rangeSet 
property describes the range of the coverage. 


O 
p1 


p2 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 223 
 


 


The abstract element gml:_Coverage is declared as follows: 


  <element name="_Coverage" type="gml:AbstractCoverageType" abstract="true" substitutionGroup="gml:_Feature"/> 
 
This element serves as the head of a substitution group which may contain any coverage whose type is 
derived from gml:AbstractCoverageType.  It may act as a variable in the definition of content models where it 
is required to permit any coverage to be valid.  


19.3.2 gml:AbstractDiscreteCoverageType, gml:_DiscreteCoverage 


A discrete coverage consists of a domain set, range set and optionally a coverage function. The domain set 
consists of either geometry or temporal objects, finite in number. The range set is comprised of a finite number 
of attribute values each of which is associated to every direct position within any single spatiotemporal object 
in the domain. In other words, the range values are constant on each spatiotemporal object in the domain. 
This coverage function maps each element from the coverage domain to an element in its range. This 
definition conforms to ISO 19123. The base type for discrete coverages is AbstractDiscreteCoverageType, 
defined in the schema as follows:   


 <complexType name="AbstractDiscreteCoverageType" abstract="true"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCoverageType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:coverageFunction" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 
The coverageFunction element describes the mapping f as shown in Figure 4.  


The abstract element gml:_DiscreteCoverage is declared as follows: 


 <element name="_DiscreteCoverage" type="gml:AbstractDiscreteCoverageType" abstract="true" 
substitutionGroup="gml:_Coverage"/> 
 
This element serves as the head of a substitution group which may contain any discrete coverage whose type 
is derived from gml:AbstractDiscreteCoverageType.   


 


19.3.3 gml:AbstractContinuousCoverageType, gml:_ContinuousCoverage 


A continuous coverage as defined in ISO 19123 is a coverage that can return different values for the same 
feature attribute at different direct positions within a single spatiotemporal object in its spatiotemporal domain. 
This definition conforms to ISO 19123. The base type for continuous coverages is 
AbstractContinuousCoverageType, defined in the schema as follows:   


 <complexType name="AbstractContinuousCoverageType" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A continuous coverage as defined in ISO 19123 is a coverage that can return different values 
for the same feature attribute at different direct positions within a single spatiotemporal object in its spatiotemporal 
domain</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCoverageType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:coverageFunction" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


224  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 
The coverageFunction element describes the mapping f as shown in Figure 4.  


The abstract element gml:_ContinuousCoverage is declared as follows: 


 <element name="_ContinuousCoverage" type="gml:AbstractContinuousCoverageType" abstract="true" 
substitutionGroup="gml:_Feature"/> 
 
This element serves as the head of a substitution group which may contain any continuous coverage whose 
type is derived from gml:AbstractContinuousCoverageType. 


19.3.4 gml:domainSet, gml:DomainSetType  


The Domain Set describes the spatio-temporal region of interest, within which the coverage is defined.  Its 
content model is given by gml:DomainSetType which is defined as follows: 


  <element name="domainSet" type="gml:DomainSetType"/> 
 
  <complexType name="DomainSetType"> 
    <choice minOccurs="0"> 
      <element ref="gml:_Geometry"/> 
      <element ref="gml:_TimeObject"/> 
    </choice> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
  </complexType> 
 
The value of the domain is thus a choice between a gml:_Geometry and a gml:_TimeObject.  In the instance 
these abstract elements will normally be substituted by a geometry complex or temporal complex, to represent 
spatial coverages and time-series, respectively.   


NOTE Spatiotemporal domains are supported if the domain is described using a compound coordinate reference 
system, one of whose components is temporal.  Otherwise, following the ISO 19100 and OGC abstract specifications, 
GML 3 does not support combined spatial-temporal domains.    


The presence of the gml:AssociationAttributeGroup means that domainSet follows the usual GML property 
model and can use the xlink:href attribute to point to the Domain, as an alternative to describing the domain 
inline. 


19.3.5 gml:rangeSet, gml:RangeSetType  


The Range Set contains the values of the coverage (sometimes called the attribute values).  Its content model 
is given by gml:RangeSetType which is defined as follows:: 


  <element name="rangeSet" type="gml:RangeSetType"/> 
 
    <complexType name="RangeSetType"> 
      <choice> 
        <element ref="gml:ValueArray" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
        <element ref="gml:_ScalarValueList" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
        <element ref="gml:DataBlock"/> 
        <element ref="gml:File"/> 
    </choice> 
  </complexType> 
 
This content model supports a structural description of the Range.  The semantic information describing the 
range set is embedded using a uniform method, as part of the explicit values, or as a template value 
accompanying the representation using gml:DataBlock and gml:File. 


c) The values from each component (or band) in the range may be encoded within a gml:ValueArray 
element or a concrete member of the gml:_ScalarValueList substitution group (e.g. gml:CategoryList, 
gml:QuantityList - see clause 16.4). Use of these elements satisfies the value-type homogeneity 
requirement  







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 225 
 


 


19.3.6 gml:DataBlock 


gml:DataBlock describes the Range as a block of text encoded values similar to a Common Separated Value 
(CSV) representation. The content model is as follows: 


    <element name="DataBlock" type="gml:DataBlockType"/> 
 
 <complexType name="DataBlockType"> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:rangeParameters"/> 
   <choice> 
    <element ref="gml:tupleList"/> 
    <element ref="gml:doubleOrNullTupleList"/> 
   </choice> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 
The range set parameterization is described by the property gml:rangeParameters.  


19.3.7 gml:rangeParameters 


The gml:rangeParameters property is declared as follows: 


  <element name="rangeParameters" type="gml:RangeParametersType"/> 
 
  <complexType name="RangeParametersType"> 
    <sequence> 
      <element ref="gml:_Value"  minOccurs="0"/>   
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
  </complexType> 
 
gml:RangeParameterType is a framework for the description of the range parameters each of which is a 
gml:_Value, as described in clause 16.4.  Specific range parameters are defined through the creation of a 
GML Application Schema that provides elements that are substitutable for gml:_Value. 


19.3.8 gml:tupleList 


The gml:tupleList property is declared as follows: 


  <element name="tupleList" type="gml:CoordinatesType"/> 
 
gml:CoordinatesType is described in clause 9.1.3.3.  It consists of a list of coordinate tuples, with each 
coordinate tuple separated by the ts or tuple separator (by default this is whitespace), and each coordinate in 
the tuple by the cs or coordinate separator (by default this is a comma). 


The gml:tupleList encoding is effectively band-interleaved. An example of a set of pairs of temperature and 
pressure observations might be recorded in a gml:DataBlock as follows: 


  <gml:DataBlock> 
   <gml:rangeParameters> 
    <gml:CompositeValue> 
     <gml:valueComponents> 
      <Temperature uom="urn:x-si:v1999:uom:degreesC">template</Temperature> 
      <Pressure uom="urn:x-si:v1999:uom:kPa">template</Pressure> 
     </gml:valueComponents> 
    </gml:CompositeValue> 
   </gml:rangeParameters> 
   <gml:tupleList>3,101.2 5,101.3 7,101.4 11,101.5  13,101.6  17,101.7  19,101.7  23,101.8  29,101.9  31,102.0  
37,102.1  41,102.2  43,102.3  47,102.4  53,102.5  59,102.6</gml:tupleList> 
  </gml:DataBlock> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


226  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 
where Temperature and Pressure are elements defined in a local application schema, using 
gml:MeasureOrNullListType.   


19.3.9 gml:doubleOrNullTupleList 


The gml:doubleOrNullTupleList property is declared as follows: 


 <element name="doubleOrNullTupleList" type="gml:doubleOrNullList"/> 
 
gml:doubleOrNullList is described in clause 7.3.4.1.  It consists of a list of doubleOrNull values, each separated 
by a whitespace. The doubleOrNull values are grouped into tuples where the dimension of each tuple in the 
list is equal to the number of range parameters. 


An example of the use of gml:doubleOrNullTupleList to record the same set of pairs of temperature and 
pressure observations given in the gml:DataBlock example above is as follows: 


  <gml:DataBlock> 
   <gml:rangeParameters> 
    <gml:CompositeValue> 
     <gml:valueComponents> 
      <Temperature uom="urn:x-si:v1999:uom:degreesC">template</Temperature> 
      <Pressure uom="urn:x-si:v1999:uom:kPa">template</Pressure> 
     </gml:valueComponents> 
    </gml:CompositeValue> 
   </gml:rangeParameters> 
   <gml:doubleOrNullTupleList>3 101.2 5 101.3 7 101.4 11 101.5  13 101.6  17 101.7  19 101.7  23 101.8  29 
101.9  31 102.0  37 102.1  41 102.2  43 102.3  47 102.4  53 102.5  59 102.6</gml:doubleOrNullTupleList> 
  </gml:DataBlock> 
 


19.3.10 gml:File, gml:FileType  


For efficiency reasons, GML 3 also provides a means of encoding the range set in an arbitrary external 
encoding, such as a binary file.  This encoding may be well-known but this is not required. This mode uses 
the gml:File element, which is declared as follows: 


  <element name="File" type="gml:FileType"/> 
 
  <complexType name="FileType"> 
    <sequence> 
      <element ref="gml:rangeParameters"/> 
      <element name="fileName" type="anyURI"/> 
      <element name="fileStructure" type="gml:FileValueModelType"/> 
      <element name="mimeType" type="anyURI" minOccurs="0"/> 
      <element name="compression" type="anyURI" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
  </complexType> 
 
In this version of the coverage encoding, the values of the coverage (attribute values in the Range set) are 
transmitted in a binary file that is referenced from the XML structure described by gml:FileType.  The binary 
file is referenced by the fileName property that is an anyURI.  This means that the binary file can be located 
remotely from the referencing GML instance. This can support, for example, both an http reference and a 
SOAP attachment. 


The compression property points to a definition of a compression algorithm through an anyURI.  This may be 
a retrievable, computable definition or simply a reference to an unambiguous name for the compression 
method. 


The mime type property points to a definition of the file mime type. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 227 
 


 


The fileStructure property is defined by the gml:FileValueModelType.  This is simple enumerated type 
restriction on string.  The only value supported in GML 3 is Record Interleaved.  Additional values may be 
supported in future releases of GML.  Note further that all values shall be enclosed in a single file.  Multi-file 
structures for values are not supported in GML 3. 


The semantics of the Range set is described as above using gml:rangeParameters. 


EXAMPLE Binary File Encoding: 


  <gml:File> 
   <gml:rangeParameters> 
    <gml:CompositeValue> 
     <gml:valueComponents> 
      <Temperature uom="urn:x-si:v1999:uom:degreesC">template</Temperature> 
      <Pressure uom="urn:x-si:v1999:uom:kPa">template</Pressure> 
     </gml:valueComponents> 
    </gml:CompositeValue> 
   </gml:rangeParameters> 
   <gml:fileName>http://www.somedata.org/temp_pressure.dat</gml:fileName> 
   <gml:fileStructure>Record Interleaved</gml:fileStructure> 
  </gml:File> 
  







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


228  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


The referenced file structure shall be as follows: 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


Figure 7  File Record Structure or Coverage File 


Note that if any compression algorithm is applied, the structure above applies only to the pre-compression or 
post-decompression structure of the file. 


Note that the fields within a record match the valueComponents of the CompositeValue in document order. 


19.3.11 gml:coverageFunction, gml:CoverageFunctionType  


This clause describes the Coverage Function (gml:coverageFunction) property, that is, the mapping f (see 
Figure 4) from the domain to the range of the coverage.  The content model for the coverage function is given 
by: 


  <element name="coverageFunction" type="gml:CoverageFunctionType"/> 
 
  <complexType name="CoverageFunctionType"> 
    <choice> 
      <element ref="gml:MappingRule"/> 
      <element ref="gml:GridFunction"/> 
    </choice> 
  </complexType> 
 
Note that the value of the CoverageFunction is one of gml:MappingRule and gml:GridFunction. 


19.3.12 gml:MappingRule 


gml:MappingRule provides a formal (e.g. MathML) or informal (e.g. free text) description of the coverage 
function, per: 


  <element name="MappingRule" type="gml:StringOrRefType"/> 


The mapping rule may be defined as an in-line string or via a remote reference through xlink:href.   


If no rule name is specified, the default is Linear with respect to members of the domain in document order.  


19.3.13 gml:GridFunction, gml:GridFunctionType  


gml:GridFunction provides an explicit mapping rule for grid geometries, i.e. the domain shall be a geometry of 
type grid.  It describes the mapping of grid posts (discrete point grid coverage) or grid cells (discrete surface 
coverage) to the values in the RangeSet.  The content model is as follows: 


  <element name="GridFunction" type="gml:GridFunctionType"/> 


. 


Record 1 
Record 2 
Record 3 


Record n 


A1    A2    A3 


Where the values in each record 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 229 
 


 


 
  <complexType name="GridFunctionType"> 
    <sequence> 
      <element name="sequenceRule" type="gml:SequenceRuleType" minOccurs="0"/> 
      <element name="startPoint" type="gml:integerList" minOccurs="0"> 
    </sequence> 
  </complexType> 
 
The startPoint is the index position of a point in the grid that is mapped to the first point in the Range Set (this 
is also the index position of the first grid post).  If the startPoint is omitted the startPoint is assumed to be 
equal to the value of gml:low in the gml:Grid geometry. Subsequent points in the mapping are determined by 
the value of the sequenceRule.  


19.3.14 gml:sequenceRule, gml:SequenceRuleType, gml:SequenceRuleNames 


The sequenceRule is described by the content model: 


  <complexType name="SequenceRuleType"> 
    <simpleContent> 
      <extension base="gml:SequenceRuleNames"> 
        <attribute name="order" type="gml:IncrementOrder" use="optional"/> 
      </extension> 
    </simpleContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
The SequenceRuleType is derived from the gml:SequenceRuleNames through the addition of an order 
attribute.  The gml:SequenceRuleNames is an enumerated type defined as: 


  <simpleType name="SequenceRuleNames"> 
    <restriction base="string"> 
      <enumeration value="Linear"/> 
      <enumeration value="Boustrophedonic"/> 
      <enumeration value="Cantor-diagonal"/> 
      <enumeration value="Spiral"/> 
      <enumeration value="Morton"/> 
      <enumeration value="Hilbert"/> 
    </restriction> 
  </simpleType> 
 
These rule names are defined in ISO 19123. 


If no rule name is specified the default is Linear. 


The order attribute is also defined in ISO 19123 and its value is determined by the content model: 


  <simpleType name="IncrementOrder"> 
    <annotation> 
      <documentation> </documentation> 
    </annotation> 
    <restriction base="string"> 
      <enumeration value="+x+y"/> 
      <enumeration value="+y+x"/> 
      <enumeration value="+x-y"/> 
      <enumeration value="-x-y"/> 
    </restriction> 
  </simpleType> 
 
The enumeration value here indicates the incrementing order to be used on the first 2 axes, i.e. "+x-y" means 
that the points on the first axis are to be traversed from lowest to highest and the points on the second axis 
are to be traversed from highest to lowest. The points on all other axes (if any) beyond the first 2 are assumed 
to increment from lowest to highest. 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


230  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


If the order attribute is omitted it is assumed to have the value +x+y. 


If the coverageFunction property is omitted for Gridded Coverages (included RectifiedGridded Coverages) the 
startPoint is assumed to be the value of the gml:low property in the gml:Grid geometry, and the sequenceRule 
is assumed to be linear and the order attribute is assumed to be +x+y.  This is best illustrated by a simple 
example as follows: 


<AverageTempPressure  
xmlns="http://www.opengis.net/app" xmlns:gml=http://www.opengis.net/gml 
xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"  
xsi:schemaLocation="http://www.opengis.net/app ./CoverageExamples.xsd"> 


 <gml:domainSet> 
  <gml:Grid dimension="2"> 
   <gml:limits> 
    <gml:GridEnvelope> 
     <gml:low>0 0</gml:low> 
     <gml:high>4 4</gml:high> 
    </gml:GridEnvelope> 
   </gml:limits> 
   <gml:axisName>x</gml:axisName> 
   <gml:axisName>y</gml:axisName> 
  </gml:Grid> 
 </gml:domainSet> 
 <gml:rangeSet> 
  <gml:DataBlock> 
   <gml:rangeParameters> 
    <gml:CompositeValue> 
     <gml:valueComponents> 
      <Temperature uom="urn:x-si:v1999:uom:degreesC">template</Temperature> 
      <Pressure uom="urn:x-si:v1999:uom:kPa">template</Pressure> 
     </gml:valueComponents> 
    </gml:CompositeValue> 
   </gml:rangeParameters> 
   <gml:tupleList>3,101.2 5,101.3 7,101.4 11,101.5  13,101.6  17,101.7  19,101.7  23,101.8  29,101.9  31,102.0  
37,102.1  41,102.2  43,102.3  47,102.4  53,102.5  59,102.6</gml:tupleList> 
  </gml:DataBlock> 
 </gml:rangeSet> 
</AverageTempPressure> 
 
Since no coverageFunction is specified the function is assumed to be that of linear scanning with +x+y order 
starting at the location (0 0).  If we look at the DataBlock we see that we have the following mapping. 


Table 5  Data block example 


Grid Location Data Value 


0 0  3,101.2 


1 0 5,101.3 


2 0 7,101.4 


3 0 11,101.5   


0 1 13,101.6   


1 1 17,101.7   


2 1 19,101.7   


3 1 23,101.8   


0 2 29,101.9   


1 2 31,102.0   


2 2 37,102.1   


3 2 41,102.2   







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 231 
 


 


0 3 43,102.3   


1 3 47,102.4   


2 3 53,102.5   


3 3 59,102.6 


 


19.3.15  Specific Coverage Types in GML 3.1 


GML 3 supports all of the discrete coverage types defined in ISO 19123. 


The supported types are derived from gml:AbstractDiscreteCoverageType and include: 


 MultiPointCoverage 


 MultiCurveCoverage 


 MultiSurfaceCoverage 


 MultiSolidCoverage 


 Gridded Coverage (discrete point coverage) 


 Rectified Grid Coverage (discrete point coverage) 


Additional specific continuous coverage types can be anticipated in future releases of GML.  Users can also 
construct their own coverage types by deriving from gml:AbstractDiscreteCoverageType, 
AbstractContinuousCoverageType or by derivation from the specific concrete coverage types above. 


Note that the same Range Set encodings apply for each of the different discrete coverage types as the latter 
are specified by the geometry type of the domain. 


19.3.16  MultiPoint Coverage 


In a MultiPoint Coverage the domain set is a gml:MultiPoint, that is a collection of arbitrarily distributed 
geometric points. The content model for a MultiPoint Coverage is as follows: 


  <complexType name="MultiPointCoverageType"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <restriction base="gml:AbstractCoverageType"> 
        <sequence> 
          <group ref="gml:StandardObjectProperties"/> 
          <element ref="gml:boundedBy"/> 
          <element ref="gml:multiPointDomain"/> 
          <element ref="gml:rangeSet"/> 
          <element ref="gml:coverageFunction" minOccurs="0"/> 
        </sequence> 
      </restriction> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 


 
Note that this is defined by restriction on gml:AbstractCoverageType.  Note that the restriction replaces the 
generic gml:domainSet by the specific gml:multiPointDomain whose value is a gml:MultiPoint. 


  <complexType name="MultiPointDomainType"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <restriction base="gml:DomainSetType"> 
        <sequence minOccurs="0"> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


232  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


          <element ref="gml:MultiPoint"/> 
        </sequence> 
      </restriction> 
    </complexContent> 
</complexType> 
 
Note that in a MultiPoint Coverage the mapping from the domain to the range is straightforward. 


a) For DataBlock encodings the points of the MultiPoint are mapped in document order to the tuples of 
the DataBlock. 


b) For CompositeValue encodings the points of the MultiPoint are mapped to the members of the 
CompositeValue in document order. 


c) For File encodings the points of the MultiPoint are mapped to the records of the File in sequential 
order. 


EXAMPLE MultiPoint Coverage (uses Value encoding): 


<AverageTempPressure  
 xmlns="http://www.opengis.net/app"  
 xmlns:gml="http://www.opengis.net/gml"  
 xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"  
 xsi:schemaLocation="http://www.opengis.net/app CoverageExamples.xsd"> 
 <gml:domainSet> 
  <gml:MultiPoint srsName="urn:EPSG:geographicCRS:4326"> 
   <gml:pointMember> 
    <gml:Point> 
     <gml:pos>1 1</gml:pos> 
    </gml:Point> 
   </gml:pointMember> 
   <gml:pointMember> 
    <gml:Point> 
     <gml:pos>2 2</gml:pos> 
    </gml:Point> 
   </gml:pointMember> 
   <gml:pointMember> 
    <gml:Point> 
     <gml:pos>3 3</gml:pos> 
    </gml:Point> 
   </gml:pointMember> 
   <gml:pointMember> 
    <gml:Point> 
     <gml:pos>4 4</gml:pos> 
    </gml:Point> 
   </gml:pointMember> 
  </gml:MultiPoint> 
 </gml:domainSet> 
 <gml:rangeSet> 
  <gml:ValueArray> 
   <gml:valueComponents> 
    <Temperature uom="urn:x-si:v1999:uom:degreesC">3</Temperature> 
    <Temperature uom="urn:x-si:v1999:uom:degreesC">5</Temperature> 
    <Temperature uom="urn:x-si:v1999:uom:degreesC">7</Temperature> 
    <Temperature uom="urn:x-si:v1999:uom:degreesC">11</Temperature> 
    <Temperature uom="urn:x-si:v1999:uom:degreesC">13</Temperature> 
    <Temperature uom="urn:x-si:v1999:uom:degreesC">17</Temperature> 
    <Temperature uom="urn:x-si:v1999:uom:degreesC">19</Temperature> 
    <Temperature uom="urn:x-si:v1999:uom:degreesC">23</Temperature> 
    <Temperature uom="urn:x-si:v1999:uom:degreesC">29</Temperature> 
    <Temperature uom="urn:x-si:v1999:uom:degreesC">31</Temperature> 
    <Temperature uom="urn:x-si:v1999:uom:degreesC">37</Temperature> 
    <Temperature uom="urn:x-si:v1999:uom:degreesC">41</Temperature> 
    <Temperature uom="urn:x-si:v1999:uom:degreesC">43</Temperature> 
    <Temperature uom="urn:x-si:v1999:uom:degreesC">47</Temperature> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 233 
 


 


    <Temperature uom="urn:x-si:v1999:uom:degreesC">53</Temperature> 
    <Temperature uom="urn:x-si:v1999:uom:degreesC">59</Temperature> 
   </gml:valueComponents> 
  </gml:ValueArray> 
 </gml:rangeSet> 
</AverageTempPressure> 


 


19.3.17 MultiCurve Coverage 


In a multi-curve coverage the domain is partioned into a collection of curve elements comprising a 
gml:MultiCurve.  The coverage function than maps each curve element in the collection to a value in the 
Range Set. The content model for the MultiCurve coverage is as follows: 


  <complexType name="MultiCurveCoverageType"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <restriction base="gml:AbstractCoverageType"> 
        <sequence> 
          <group ref="gml:StandardObjectProperties"/> 
          <element ref="gml:boundedBy"/> 
          <element ref="gml:multiCurveDomain"/> 
          <element ref="gml:rangeSet"/> 
          <element ref="gml:coverageFunction" minOccurs="0"/> 
        </sequence> 
      </restriction> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
Note that the domainSet is now a multiCurveDomain with value a gml:MultiCurve. 


The coverage function provides a mapping from the elements of the MultiCurve to the values in the Range 
Set. 


In the DataBlock encoding, the members of the MultiCurve (value of the multiCurveDomain) are mapped to 
the tuples in the DataBlock in document order. 


In the File encoding, the members of the MultiCurve are mapped to the records in the File in document order. 


In the CompositeValue encoding the members of the MultiCurve are mapped to the members of the 
CompositeValue in document order. 


EXAMPLE MultiCurve Coverage (uses DataBlock encoding): 


<AverageTempPressure  
 xmlns="http://www.opengis.net/app"  
 xmlns:gml="http://www.opengis.net/gml"  
 xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"  
 xsi:schemaLocation="http://www.opengis.net/app CoverageExamples.xsd"> 
 <gml:domainSet> 
  <gml:MultiCurve srsName="urn:EPSG:geographicCRS:4326"> 
   <gml:curveMember> 
    <gml:LineString> 
     <gml:posList dimension="2">1.1 1.1 2.2 2.2</gml:posList> 
    </gml:LineString> 
   </gml:curveMember> 
   <gml:curveMember> 
    <gml:LineString> 
     <gml:posList dimension="2">2.2 2.2 3.3 3.3</gml:posList> 
    </gml:LineString> 
   </gml:curveMember> 
   <gml:curveMember> 
    <gml:LineString> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


234  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


     <gml:posList dimension="2">3.3 3.3 4.4 4.4</gml:posList> 
    </gml:LineString> 
   </gml:curveMember> 
   <gml:curveMember> 
    <gml:LineString> 
     <gml:posList dimension="2">4.4 4.4 5.5 5.5</gml:posList> 
    </gml:LineString> 
   </gml:curveMember> 
  </gml:MultiCurve> 
 </gml:domainSet> 
 <gml:rangeSet> 
  <gml:DataBlock> 
   <gml:rangeParameters> 
    <gml:CompositeValue> 
     <gml:valueComponents> 
      <Temperature uom="urn:x-si:v1999:uom:degreesC">template</Temperature> 
      <Pressure uom="urn:x-si:v1999:uom:kPa">template</Pressure> 
     </gml:valueComponents> 
    </gml:CompositeValue> 
   </gml:rangeParameters> 
   <gml:doubleOrNullTupleList>3 101.2 5 101.3 7 101.4 11 101.5</gml:doubleOrNullTupleList> 
  </gml:DataBlock> 
 </gml:rangeSet> 
</AverageTempPressure> 
 


19.3.18  MultiSurface Coverage 


In a multi-surface coverage the domain is partioned into a collection of surface elements comprising a 
gml:MultiSurface.  The coverage function than maps each surface element in the collection to a value in the 
Range Set. The content model for the MultiSurface coverage is as follows: 


  <complexType name="MultiSurfaceCoverageType"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <restriction base="gml:AbstractCoverageType"> 
        <sequence> 
          <group ref="gml:StandardObjectProperties"/> 
          <element ref="gml:boundedBy"/> 
          <element ref="gml:multiSurfaceDomain"/> 
          <element ref="gml:rangeSet"/> 
          <element ref="gml:coverageFunction" minOccurs="0"/> 
        </sequence> 
      </restriction> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
Note that the domainSet is now a multiSurfaceDomain with value a gml:MultiSurface. 


The coverage function provides a mapping from the elements of the MultiSurface to the values in the Range 
Set. 


In the DataBlock encoding, the members of the MultiSurface (value of the multiSurfaceDomain) are mapped 
to the tuples in the DataBlock in document order. 


In the File encoding, the members of the MultiSurface are mapped to the records in the File in document 
order. 


In the CompositeValue encoding the members of the MultiSurface are mapped to the members of the 
CompositeValue in document order. 


EXAMPLE MultiSurface Coverage (uses File encoding for values): 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 235 
 


 


<SoilData xmlns="http://www.opengis.net/app" xmlns:gml="http://www.opengis.net/gml" 
xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:schemaLocation="http://www.opengis.net/app 
./CoverageExamples.xsd"> 
 <gml:domainSet> 
  <gml:MultiSurface srsName="urn:EPSG:geographicCRS:4326"> 
   <gml:surfaceMember> 
    <gml:Polygon gid="p1"> 
     <gml:exterior> 
      <gml:LinearRing> 
     <gml:posList dimension="3">1. 2. 3.</gml:posList> 
      </gml:LinearRing> 
     </gml:exterior> 
    </gml:Polygon> 
   </gml:surfaceMember> 
   <gml:surfaceMember> 
    <gml:Polygon gid="p6"> 
     <gml:exterior> 
      <gml:LinearRing> 
     <gml:posList dimension="3">4. 5. 6.</gml:posList> 
      </gml:LinearRing> 
     </gml:exterior> 
    </gml:Polygon> 
   </gml:surfaceMember> 
   <gml:surfaceMember> 
    <gml:Polygon gid="p11"> 
     <gml:exterior> 
      <gml:LinearRing> 
     <gml:posList dimension="3">7. 8. 9.</gml:posList> 
      </gml:LinearRing> 
     </gml:exterior> 
    </gml:Polygon> 
   </gml:surfaceMember> 
   <gml:surfaceMember> 
    <gml:Polygon gid="p16"> 
     <gml:exterior> 
      <gml:LinearRing> 
     <gml:posList dimension="3">10. 11. 12.</gml:posList> 
      </gml:LinearRing> 
     </gml:exterior> 
    </gml:Polygon> 
   </gml:surfaceMember> 
  </gml:MultiSurface> 
 </gml:domainSet> 
 <gml:rangeSet> 
  <gml:File> 
   <gml:rangeParameters> 
    <gml:CompositeValue> 
     <gml:valueComponent> 
      <SoilType codeSpace="http://my.big.org/classifications/soils">template</SoilType> 
     </gml:valueComponent> 
     <gml:valueComponent> 
      <SoilMoisture uom="http://my.big.org/units/percent">template</SoilMoisture> 
     </gml:valueComponent> 
    </gml:CompositeValue> 
   </gml:rangeParameters> 
   <gml:fileName>soil.dat</gml:fileName> 
   <gml:fileStructure>Record Interleaved</gml:fileStructure> 
  </gml:File> 
 </gml:rangeSet> 
 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


236  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


19.3.19 MultiSolid Coverage 


In a multi-solid coverage the domain is partioned into a collection of solid elements comprising a 
gml:MultiSolid.  The coverage function than maps each solid element in the collection to a value in the Range 
Set. The content model for the MultiSolid coverage is as follows: 


  <complexType name="MultiSolidCoverageType"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <restriction base="gml:AbstractCoverageType"> 
        <sequence> 
          <group ref="gml:StandardObjectProperties"/> 
          <element ref="gml:boundedBy"/> 
          <element ref="gml:multiSolidDomain"/> 
          <element ref="gml:rangeSet"/> 
          <element ref="gml:coverageFunction" minOccurs="0"/> 
        </sequence> 
      </restriction> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
Note that the domainSet is now a multiSolidDomain with value a gml:MultiSolid. 


The coverage function provides a mapping from the elements of the MultiSolid to the values in the Range Set. 


In the DataBlock encoding, the members of the MultiSolid (value of the multiSolidDomain) are mapped to the 
tuples in the DataBlock in document order. 


In the File encoding, the members of the MultiSolid are mapped to the records in the File in document order. 


In the CompositeValue encoding the members of the MultiSolid are mapped to the members of the 
CompositeValue in document order. 


19.3.20 Gridded Coverage 


A gridded coverage is a discrete point coverage in which the domain set is a geometric grid of points as 
shown in Figure 8. 


 


 


 


 


Figure 8  Gridded Coverage domain is a grid of points 


The content model for the gridded coverage is as follows: 


 <element name="GridCoverage" type="gml:GridCoverageType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Coverage"/> 
 
  <complexType name="GridCoverageType"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <restriction base="gml:AbstractCoverageType"> 
        <sequence> 
          <group ref="gml:StandardObjectProperties"/> 
          <element ref="gml:boundedBy"/> 
          <element ref="gml:gridDomain"/> 
          <element ref="gml:rangeSet"/> 
          <element ref="gml:coverageFunction" minOccurs="0"/> 
        </sequence> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 237 
 


 


      </restriction> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
Note that this is the same as the MultiPoint coverage except that we have a gml:gridDomain property to 
describe the domain. 


The gml:gridDomain is defined as: 


  <complexType name="GridDomainType"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <restriction base="gml:DomainSetType"> 
        <choice minOccurs="0"> 
          <element ref="gml:Grid"/> 
        </choice> 
      </restriction> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
The gml:Grid is defined in the grids.xsd discussed in Clause 19.2. Note that the simple gridded coverage is 
not geometrically referenced and hence no geometric positions are assignable to the points in the grid. Such 
geometric positioning is introduced in the RectifiedGrid Coverage discussed in Clause 19.2.2. 


EXAMPLE Grid Coverage (uses File encoding for values): 


<AverageTempPressure> 
 <gml:gridDomain> 
  <gml:Grid dimension="2"> 
   <gml:limits> 
    <gml:GridEnvelope> 
     <gml:low>0 0</gml:low> 
     <gml:high>4 4</gml:high> 
    </gml:GridEnvelope> 
   </gml:limits> 
   <gml:axisName>x</gml:axisName> 
   <gml:axisName>y</gml:axisName> 
  </gml:Grid> 
 </gml:gridDomain> 
 <gml:rangeSet> 
  <gml:File> 
   <gml:rangeParameters> 
    <gml:CompositeValue> 
     <gml:valueComponents> 
      <Temperature uom="urn:x-si:v1999:uom:degreesC">template</Temperature> 
      <Pressure uom="urn:x-si:v1999:uom:kPa">template</Pressure> 
     </gml:valueComponents> 
    </gml:CompositeValue> 
   </gml:rangeParameters> 
   <gml:fileName>http://www.somedata.org/temp_pressure.dat</gml:fileName> 
   <gml:fileStructure>Record Interleaved</gml:fileStructure> 
  </gml:File> 
 </gml:rangeSet> 
</AverageTempPressure> 
 
 


19.3.21 RectifiedGrid Coverage 


The rectified grid coverage is a discrete point coverage based on a rectified grid. 


The rectified grid coverage is similar to the grid coverage of Clause 19.2.2 except that the points of the grid 
are geometrically referenced.  The rectified grid coverage has a domain that is a RectifiedGrid geometry as 
defined in the grids.xsd of Clause 19.2. 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


238  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


The content model for gml:RectifiedGridCoverage is as follows: 


 


  <complexType name="RectifiedGridCoverageType"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <restriction base="gml:AbstractCoverageType"> 
        <sequence> 
          <group ref="gml:StandardObjectProperties"/> 
          <element ref="gml:boundedBy"/> 
          <element ref="gml:rectifiedGridDomain"/> 
          <element ref="gml:rangeSet"/> 
          <element ref="gml:coverageFunction" minOccurs="0"/> 
        </sequence> 
      </restriction> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
Note that the coverage domain is described by gml:rectifiedGridDomain. 


  <complexType name="RectifiedGridDomainType"> 
    <complexContent> 
      <restriction base="gml:DomainSetType"> 
        <choice minOccurs="0"> 
          <element ref="gml:RectifiedGrid"/> 
        </choice> 
      </restriction> 
    </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 
where the gml:RectifiedGrid geometry is defined in grids.xsd discussed in Clause 19.2. 


EXAMPLE RectifiedGrid Coverage (using DataBlock): 


<AveragePressure xmlns="http://www.opengis.net/app" xmlns:gml="http://www.opengis.net/gml" 
xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xsi:schemaLocation="http://www.opengis.net/app 
./CoverageExamples.xsd"> 
 <gml:rectifiedGridDomain> 
  <gml:RectifiedGrid dimension="2"> 
   <gml:limits> 
    <gml:GridEnvelope> 
     <gml:low>1 1</gml:low> 
     <gml:high>4 4</gml:high> 
    </gml:GridEnvelope> 
   </gml:limits> 
   <gml:axisName>u</gml:axisName> 
   <gml:axisName>v</gml:axisName> 
   <gml:origin> 
    <gml:Point gml:id="palindrome" srsName="urn:EPSG:geographicCRS:4327"> 
     <gml:pos>1.2 3.3 2.1</gml:pos> 
    </gml:Point> 
   </gml:origin> 
   <gml:offsetVector srsName="urn:EPSG:geographicCRS:4327">1.1 2.2 3.3</gml:offsetVector> 
   <gml:offsetVector srsName="urn:EPSG:geographicCRS:4327">2.0 1.0 0.0</gml:offsetVector> 
  </gml:RectifiedGrid> 
 </gml:rectifiedGridDomain> 
 <gml:rangeSet> 
  <gml:DataBlock> 
   <gml:rangeParameters> 
    <gml:CompositeValue> 
     <gml:valueComponents> 
      <Pressure uom="urn:x-si:v1999:uom:kPa">template</Pressure> 
     </gml:valueComponents> 
    </gml:CompositeValue> 
   </gml:rangeParameters> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 239 
 


 


   <gml:doubleOrNullTupleList>101.2 101.3 101.4 101.5  101.6 101.7 101.7 101.8 101.9 102.0 102.1 102.2 102.3 
102.4 102.5 102.6</gml:doubleOrNullTupleList> 
  </gml:DataBlock> 
 </gml:rangeSet> 
</AveragePressure> 


20 GML schemas  default styling 


20.1 General concepts 


One of the requirements in developing of GML is the strict separation of data and presentation. Therefore 
none of the GML data description constructs have built-in capability to describe the styling information. Rather, 
the default styling mechanism was created as a separate model that can be plugged-in to a GML data set. 
An example of the use of such pluggable mechanism is data styling information persistence. 


The term default signifies very relaxed relation to other parts of the GML model. The style information that is 
assigned to a data set may be used for styling but may also be completely ignored. 


The default style schema is directly related to the rest of the GML schemas only in that it imports some very 
basic constructs from it. None of the other GML schemas depend on the styling one. It also depends on W3C 
Synchronized Multimedia Integration Language (SMIL) schemas. 


The relation of the default style information and GML data instances is achieved through the gml:deafultStyle 
property defined in defaultStyle.xsd schema. The property may be assigned to the instance by defining such a 
relationship in application schema. Since GML is feature-based encoding, GML default style always applies to 
a feature, features or feature collections. 


The UML containment diagram of the styling model is shown in Figure 9. 


 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


240  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


LabelStyle


<<mixed>>+label : LabelExpression
+style : string


+aestheticCriteria


+minDistance


+drawingType
+graphType


+minAngle
+lineType


+directed


+planar


+grid


GraphStyle


FeatureStyle


+queryGrammar : enumeration
+featureConstraint : string
+featureType : string
+baseType : string


GeometryStyle


+geometryProperty : string
+geometryType : string
+symbol : SymbolType


TopologyStyle


+topologyProperty : string
+symbol : SymbolType


+topologyType : string


Feature


Style


+geometryStyle0..* +topologyStyle0..*


+graphStyle0..1


+featureStyle0..*


+labelStyle


0..1


+labelStyle


0..1


+defaultStyle0..*


 


Figure 9  The GML default styling containment model diagram 


 


The UML inheritance diagram of the styling model is shown in Figure 10. 


 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 241 
 


 


LabelStyle


<<mixed>>+label : LabelExpression
+style : string


BaseStyleDescriptor


+styleVariation : StyleVariationType
+spatialResolution : ScaleType
+animation attributes


+aestheticCriteria


+minDistance


+drawingType
+graphType


+minAngle
+lineType


+directed


+planar


+grid


GraphStyle


FeatureStyle


+queryGrammar : enumeration


+featureConstraint : string
+featureType : string


+baseType : string


+metaDataProperty : MetaData


+description : string


+name : string


+id : ID


_GML


GeometryStyle


+geometryProperty : string
+geometryType : string
+symbol : SymbolType


TopologyStyle


+topologyProperty : string
+symbol : SymbolType


+topologyType : string


_Style


Style


 


Figure 10  The GML default styling inheritance model diagram 


 


20.2 Top-level styling elements 


The connection between a GML data set and a styling description is minimal. It is established through only 
one property, the gml:defaultStyle. The value of this property, the gml:Style object, contains all styling 
descriptions..  


20.2.1 gml:defaultStyle 


The gml:defaultStyle property is a property defined as a global element in GML namespace and thus can be 
assigned to any feature or a feature collection defined in an application schema. The definition of the property 
is shown in the following listing: 


<element name="defaultStyle" type="gml:DefaultStylePropertyType"/> 
 
<complexType name="DefaultStylePropertyType"> 
  <sequence> 
    <element ref="gml:_Style" minOccurs="0"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attribute name="about" type="anyURI" use="optional"/> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
</complexType> 
 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


242  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


To include this property in a feature users shall do so via the feature application schema. This is achieved by 
including it in a definition in an application schema. Following is an example of an exp:Road feature definition 
that includes the gml:defaultStyle property. 


<element name="Road" type="exp:RoadType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Feature"/> 
 
<complexType name="RoadType"> 
  <complexContent> 
    <extension base="gml:AbstractFeatureType"> 
      <sequence> 
        <element ref="gml:centerLineOf"/> 
        <element ref="gml:defaultStyle"/> 
      </sequence> 
    </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
</complexType> 
 
The gml:AssociationAttributeGroup on the property contains the simple XLink attribute group from xlinks.xsd 
schema and the  the remoteSchema attribute. Attributes from xslinks.xsd schema allow a user to specify the 
value of the property remotely instead of inline. The remoteSchema attribute may be used to specify the 
schema of the propertys value. 


The about attribute on the property allows us to assign the style to an arbitrary feature or feature collection 
regardless of the styles location. The meaning of the attribute is that The style is about (applies to) feature or 
features that can be found at the URI that is the attribute value. 


20.2.2 gml:Style 


The gml:Style object is the default concrete value of the gml:defaultStyle property. It is the top-level styling 
object that encapsulates all other, partial style descriptions. Its definition is presented in the following listing: 


<element name="Style" type="gml:StyleType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Style"/> 
 
<complexType name="StyleType"> 
 <complexContent> 
  <extension base="gml:AbstractStyleType"> 
   <sequence> 
    <element ref="gml:featureStyle" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
    <element ref="gml:graphStyle" minOccurs="0"/> 
   </sequence> 
  </extension> 
 </complexContent> 
</complexType> 
 
The gml:StyleType which is the content model of the gml:Style object extends the gml:AbstractStyleType. This 
base abstract type serves as an abstract base for extensibility purposes, i.e. creating custom style objects, 
and it does not add any new content to the gml:AbstractGMLType from which it derives. This can be seen in 
the listing below: 


<element name="_Style" type="gml:AbstractStyleType" abstract="true" substitutionGroup="gml:_GML"/> 
 
<complexType name="AbstractStyleType" abstract="true"> 
  <complexContent> 
    <extension base="gml:AbstractGMLType"/> 
  </complexContent> 
</complexType> 
 
However, it is not assumed that creating custom style objects will be usual practice since gml:Style object 
provides rich capabilities for describing styles. In case of using this mechanism, usual GML rules have to be 
observed:  


d) The content model of the custom style object has to derive from gml:AbstractStyleType. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 243 
 


 


e) The custom style object has to be substitutable for abstract gml:_Style. 


The definition of the gml:Style object presented previously in the text is itself a proper example of using the 
extensibility mechanism and it shows how these rules are implemented in the schema. 


The function of the styling elements in the gml:Style object, namely gml:FeatureStyle and gml:GraphStyle is to 
describe styles for two aspects of GML data: individual features and topology graphs that consist of collections 
of features. Note that elements that describe styles for particular aspects of features, namely, feature style, 
graph style, geometry style, topology style and label style are often called style descriptors.   


20.3 Feature style 


20.3.1 gml:FeatureStyle 


Feature style descriptor is assigned to the gml:Style element using gml:featureStyle property. It allows, like 
other GML properties, to specify the value inline or remotely. For that purpose it has the attributes from the 
gml:AssociationAttributeGroup as well as the about attribute. Its schema is shown in the following listing: 


<element name="featureStyle" type="gml:FeatureStylePropertyType"/> 
 
<complexType name="FeatureStylePropertyType"> 
 <sequence> 
  <element ref="gml:FeatureStyle" minOccurs="0"/> 
 </sequence> 
 <attribute name="about" type="anyURI" use="optional"/> 
 <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
</complexType>  
 
Its value is gml:FeatureStyle  the feature style descriptor. Feature style descriptor describes the styling information for a 
set of feature instances. The set is defined by the selection mechanisms that are part of this style descriptor. The style 
applies to each feature in the set independently - no relations that might exist among features in the set are significant. 
(The opposite case is graph style where the style applies to a set of features as a whole). The definition of the feature style 
descriptor is shown in the following listing: 
 
<element name="FeatureStyle" type="gml:FeatureStyleType" substitutionGroup="gml:_GML"/> 
 
<complexType name="FeatureStyleType"> 
 <complexContent> 
  <extension base="gml:AbstractGMLType"> 
   <sequence> 
    <element name="featureConstraint" type="string" minOccurs="0"/> 
    <element ref="gml:geometryStyle" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
    <element ref="gml:topologyStyle" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
    <element ref="gml:labelStyle" minOccurs="0"/> 
   </sequence> 
   <attribute name="featureType" type="string" use="optional"/> 
   <attribute name="baseType" type="string" use="optional"/> 


<attribute name="queryGrammar" type="gml:QueryGrammarEnumeration"/> 
  </extension> 
 </complexContent> 
</complexType> 
 
Feature instances to which the style applies are selected using one of the  attributes featureType or baseType 
and gml:featureConstraint element. These two attributes shall be used exclusively, with or without the 
gml:featureConstraint element. 


20.3.2 featureType 


The simplest and most common way of relating features and styles is by using this attribute. Its value will be 
the declared name of a feature, instances of which we want to style. For example, if the value is exp:Road, the 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


244  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


gml:FeatureStyle object will simply apply to all Road features. The value of this attribute is always the name of 
the element from the application schema that declares the feature. 


20.3.3 baseType 


Another way of selecting the feature instances to which the style applies is to specify, as the value of this 
attribute, the name of the base type from which feature or features derive. This is always the name of an 
XMLSchema complex type. Any complex type from the derivation chain can be used; the style applies to any 
feature instance that ultimatelly derives from it. If we use, for example, gml:AbstractFeatureType as the 
attributes value, the style applies to all feature instances in a data set. 


20.3.4 featureConstraint 


This property is used to further constrain the feature instance set to which the style applies. It is optional and 
it's value is an XPath expression. If the property does not exist, the style applies to all feature instances 
selected by featureType or baseType attribute. 


20.3.5 queryGrammar 


The value of this property which is defined as an enumeration specifies the grammar that is used in the 
content of the gml:featureConstraint element The enumeration allows for three values: Xpath, Xquery and 
other. 


Styling features means styling a particular aspect or aspects of a feature. We can style feature geometry, 
topology or display arbitrary text string. Feature style contains three style descriptors for respective purposes: 
gml:GeometryStyle, gml:TopologyStyle and gml:LabelStyle. 


20.4 Geometry Style 


The value of the gml:geometryStyle property is gml:GeometryStyle descriptor which describes the style for 
one geometry of a feature. Any number of geometry style descriptors can be assigned to one feature style. 
This is usually required for features  with multiple geometry properties. 


Geometry style property and descriptor are defined as follows: 


<element name="geometryStyle" type="gml:GeometryStylePropertyType"/> 
 
<complexType name="GeometryStylePropertyType"> 
 <sequence> 
  <element ref="gml:GeometryStyle" minOccurs="0"/> 
 </sequence> 
 <attribute name="about" type="anyURI" use="optional"/> 
 <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
</complexType> 
 
<element name="GeometryStyle" type="gml:GeometryStyleType" substitutionGroup="gml:_GML"/> 
 
<complexType name="GeometryStyleType"> 
 <complexContent> 
  <extension base="gml:BaseStyleDescriptorType"> 
   <sequence> 
    <choice> 
     <element ref="gml:symbol"/> 
     <element name="style" type="string"> 
      <annotation> 
       <appinfo>deprecated</appinfo> 
       <documentation> 


Deprecated in GML version 3.1.0. Use symbol with inline content instead. 
</documentation> 


      </annotation> 
     </element> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 245 
 


 


    </choice>     
    <element ref="gml:labelStyle" minOccurs="0"/> 
   </sequence> 
   <attribute name="geometryProperty" type="string"/> 
   <attribute name="geometryType" type="string"/> 
  </extension> 
 </complexContent> 
</complexType> 
 
The gml :geometryStyle is defined in the same manner as other GML properties which allow for referencing 
the value remotelly or inline. 


The geometryProperty attribute on the gml:GeometryStyle specifies the name of the geometry property of a 
feature to which this geometry style descriptor applies. It is necessary to specify the geometry type using 
geometryType attribute as well since the application schema of the geometry property may allow different 
geometries as it's value. 


Element gml:symbol is described in the section 20.7.2. 


20.5 Topology Style 


The value of the gml:topologyStyle property is gml:TopologyStyle descriptor which describes the style for one 
topology property. Similarly to the gml:Geometry style, a feature can have multiple topology properties, thus 
multiple topology style descriptors can be specified within one feature style. 


The definition of topology style property and descriptor are presented in the following listing: 


 
<element name="topologyStyle" type="gml:TopologyStylePropertyType"/> 
 
<complexType name="TopologyStylePropertyType"> 
 <sequence> 
  <element ref="gml:TopologyStyle" minOccurs="0"/> 
 </sequence> 
 <attribute name="about" type="anyURI" use="optional"/> 
 <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
</complexType> 
 
<element name="TopologyStyle" type="gml:TopologyStyleType" substitutionGroup="gml:_GML"/> 
 
<complexType name="TopologyStyleType"> 
 <complexContent> 
  <extension base="gml:BaseStyleDescriptorType"> 
   <sequence> 
    <choice> 
     <element ref="gml:symbol"/> 
     <element name="style" type="string"> 
      <annotation> 
       <appinfo>deprecated</appinfo> 
       <documentation> 


Deprecated in GML version 3.1.0. Use symbol with inline content instead. 
</documentation> 


      </annotation> 
     </element> 
    </choice>     
    <element ref="gml:labelStyle" minOccurs="0"/> 
   </sequence> 
   <attribute name="topologyProperty" type="string"/> 
   <attribute name="topologyType" type="string"/> 
  </extension> 
 </complexContent> 
</complexType> 
 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


246  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


The gml :topologyStyle property is defined in the same manner as other GML properties which allow for 
referencing the value remotelly or inline. 


The topologyProperty attribute on the gml:TopologyStyle descriptor specifies the name of the topology property 
of a feature to which this topology style descriptor applies. It is necessary to specify the topology type using 
topologyType attribute as well since the application schema of the topology property may allow different 
topologies as it's value. 


Element gml:symbol is described in the section 20.7.2. 


20.6 Label Style 


The value of the gml:labelStyle property is gml:LabelStyle descriptor which describes the style for the text that 
is to be displayed along with the graphical representation of a feature. The content of the label is not 
necessarily defined in the GML data set. More precisely, the content can be static text specified in the style 
itself and the text from the GML data set. 


Label style has two elements: gml:style that specifies the style and gml:label that is used to compose the label 
content. The definitions of the gml:labelStyle property and gml:LabelStyle descriptor are given in the following 
listing: 


 
<element name="labelStyle" type="gml:LabelStylePropertyType"/> 
 
<complexType name="LabelStylePropertyType"> 
 <sequence> 
  <element ref="gml:LabelStyle" minOccurs="0"/> 
 </sequence> 
 <attribute name="about" type="anyURI" use="optional"/> 
 <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
</complexType> 
 
<element name="LabelStyle" type="gml:LabelStyleType" substitutionGroup="gml:_GML"/> 
 
<complexType name="LabelStyleType"> 
 <complexContent> 
  <extension base="gml:BaseStyleDescriptorType"> 
   <sequence> 
    <element name="style" type="string"/> 
    <element name="label" type="gml:LabelType"/> 
   </sequence> 
  </extension> 
 </complexContent> 
</complexType> 
 
The gml :labelStyle property is defined in the same manner as other GML properties which allow for referencing the value 
remotelly or inline. 
 
The gml:style element is used to specify the style of the rendered text. The type of this element is xsd:string 
and the CSS2 styling expressions grammar is used to express graphic properties. The following example 
shows the use of the gml:style element in the geometry style context. 


<gml:FeatureStyle featureType="exp:City"> 
  <gml:GeometryStyle> 
    <gml:style>fill:blue;stroke:white</gml:style> 
  </gml:GeometryStyle> 
</gml:FeatureStyle> 
 


As noted, the gml:label property on the gml:LabelStyle descriptor holds the textual content that can be 
composed of static text and the text extracted from the GML data. The definition of the gml:label element that is 
used to extract the data is given below:  







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 247 
 


 


<complexType name="LabelType" mixed="true"> 
  <sequence> 
    <element name="LabelExpression" type="string" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attribute ref="gml:transform" use="optional"/> 
</complexType> 
 
The content model is mixed to allow both text content and unbounded number of gml:LabelExpression 
elements. The value of gml:LabelExpression element is an XPath expression that selects the value of some 
property of the feature.  


For example consider this GML data fragment and corresponding gml:label style: 


<exp:City> 
  <gml:name>Belgrade</gml:name> 
  <exp:size>1,700,000</exp:size> 
  <gml:extentOf> 
   
  </gml:extentOf> 
</exp:City> 
 
<gml:FeatureStyle featureType="exp:City"> 
  <gml:LabelStyle> 
    <gml:style>font-family:Verdana;font-size:18;fill:red</gml:style> 
    <gml:label> 
      City:  
      <gml:LabelExpression>//City/name</gml:LabelExpression> 
      , Size: 
      <gml:LabelExpression>//City/size</gml:LabelExpression> 
    </gml:label> 
  </gml:LabelStyle> 
</gml:FeatureStyle> 
 
This label style will result in the following text being displayed: 


City: Belgrade, Size: 1,700,000 


20.7 Common styling elements  


20.7.1 Overview 


Some common styling elements are used in multiple style descriptors. The gml:symbol element is used by 
geometry and topology style descriptors. The spatialResolution, styleVariation and animation attributes are 
declared in gml:BaseStyleDesriptorType, and inherited by geometry, topology, label and graph style descriptors. 


20.7.2 gml:symbol 


The symbol element specifies a graphical symbol used to render a geometry or a topology. A symbol is a 
description of graphical attributes of a graphical object without a particular, implicit meaning. It can be a 
description of a line, circle, polygon or more complex drawing. Using the symbol element, we can specify a 
particular symbol in two ways: 


a) Remote: Just like any other remote property, the symbol property has the 
gml:AssociationAttributeGroup attributes that allow for specifying a link pointing to a remote object. 


b) Inline: The value of the gml:symbol property is the any specifier. This allows for specifying an arbitrary 
grammar for the symbol. 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


248  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


This element has two additional attributes: symbolType and transform. The symbolType attribute is 
enumeration and can take one of three values: svg, xpath or other. Applications will rely on the value of this 
attribute to decide how to interpret the symbol.  


The transform attribute allows us to specify a transformation expression that will be applied to the symbol in 
the rendering phase. It's type is xsd:string and the value is specified in the SVG specification (transform 
attribute). 


 


20.7.3 gml:styleVariation 


The function of the styleVariation element is manifold: 


a) Styling labels: Label style does not have a symbol associated with it since the content is not graphical 
but is given textually. Using this property we can specify it's style attributes.  


b) Styling symbol variations: One symbol is often used in different cases with slight modifications. It 
would be cumbersome to create and manage large number of virtually identical symbols; it is easier to 
create and use only one symbol and express minor differences in it's style using this property. 


c) Parametrized styles: Parametrized styles are styles whose attributes depend on some property of the 
feature being styled. For example, a city might be styled differently depending on it's population. The 
styleVariation property allows for specifying such dependencies. 


The definition of this element's content is: 


<complexType name="StyleVariationType"> 
  <simpleContent> 
    <extension base="string"> 
      <attribute name="styleProperty" type="string" use="required"/> 
      <attribute name="featurePropertyRange" type="string" use="optional"/> 
    </extension> 
  </simpleContent> 
</complexType> 
 
It has two attributes: styleProperty and featurePropertyRange. The value of the styleProperty is an SVG 
styling attribute name, such as stroke, fill, etc. It specifies what attribute of the style the property sets or 
overrides. The value of the styleVariation element is the value of the styling attribute specified by the 
styleProperty. The value may be a constant expression or an XPath expression. 


The featurePropertyRange attribute defines the subset of features to which the variation applies. It's value is 
an XPath expression.  


The following example shows two variations of the symbol style for a City feature. The feature is styled using a 
circle symbol. The radius of the circle depends on the population of the city, and is also calculated differently 
depending whether the population of the city is greater or less than 2 million. 


<gml:FeatureStyle featureType="exp:City"> 
  <gml:GeometryStyle> 
    <gml:styleVariation  


styleProperty="r"  
featurePropertyRange="population &gt;= 2000000">population div 1000000</gml:styleVariation> 


    <gml:styleVariation  
styleProperty="r"  
featurePropertyRange="population &lt; 2000000">population div 1000000</gml:styleVariation> 


    <gml:symbol xlink:href="http://www.opengis.org/symbols/City.xml#City"/> 
  </gml:GeometryStyle> 
</gml:FeatureStyle> 
 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 249 
 


 


20.7.4 gml:spatialResolution 


The value of the spatialResolution element is defined in the measures.xsd GML schema. The value is derived 
from the measure type, which is xsd:double type with uom (units of measure) attribute. In GML styling, the 
meaning of this element is based on the corresponding definition in ISO 19115 (Metadata), where it is defined 
as a factor that provides a general understanding of the density of spatial data in the data set.  Other than this 
informal definition, GML does not specify the exact use of this attribute. Application developers can use 
spatialResolution in different ways. For example, it can be used as a map scale denominator (1:50,000, 
1:25000, etc.). Applications can also use it's value to determine how to draw features in different scales. For 
example, a city and it's features are typically drawn in more details on a large scale map, and perhaps only as 
a single symbol on a small scale map. Or a coastline can be drawn in detail on a large scale map, while a 
small scale map application can omit some coordinates for better performance. 


20.7.5 animation 


Animation attributes are used to describe the animation behaviour of the geometry, topology, label or graph. 
These attributes are defined in the W3C SMIL specification (SMIL 2.0 BasicAnimation Elements): 


Table 6 Attributes used for Animation 


Attribute Used For 


animate Generic attribute animation 


animateMotion Moving an element along the path 


animateColor Animating colour attributes 


set Setting the value of an attribute for a specified duration 


 


20.8 Graph Style 


The gml:graphStyle property of the gml:FeatureStyle descriptor has as its value the gml:GraphStyle descriptor 
which describes style attributes of a graph formed by a set of features. The definitions of the graph style 
property and descriptor are shown in the following listing: 


 
<element name="graphStyle" type="gml:GraphStylePropertyType"/> 
 
<complexType name="GraphStylePropertyType"> 
 <sequence> 
  <element ref="gml:GraphStyle" minOccurs="0"/> 
 </sequence> 
 <attribute name="about" type="anyURI" use="optional"/> 
 <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
</complexType> 
 
<element name="GraphStyle" type="gml:GraphStyleType" substitutionGroup="gml:_GML"/> 
 
<complexType name="GraphStyleType"> 
 <complexContent> 
  <extension base="gml:BaseStyleDescriptorType"> 
   <sequence> 
    <element name="planar" type="boolean" minOccurs="0"/> 
    <element name="directed" type="boolean" minOccurs="0"/> 
    <element name="grid" type="boolean" minOccurs="0"/> 
    <element name="minDistance" type="double" minOccurs="0"/> 
    <element name="minAngle" type="double" minOccurs="0"/> 
    <element name="graphType" type="gml:GraphTypeType" minOccurs="0"/> 
    <element name="drawingType" type="gml:DrawingTypeType" minOccurs="0"/> 
    <element name="lineType" type="gml:LineTypeType" minOccurs="0"/> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


250  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


    <element name="aestheticCriteria" type="gml:AesheticCriteriaType" minOccurs="0" 
maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
   </sequence> 
  </extension> 
 </complexContent> 
</complexType> 
 
The gml :graphStyle property is defined in the same manner as other GML properties which allow for referencing the value 
remotelly or inline. 
 
Graph style descriptor describes the style for a graph as a whole, not for individual graph elements. It inherits 
from the base content model common styling properties described in the section 20.2. 


This descriptor adds to the base content model a group of properties specific to graph styling  they describe 
the graph in terms of it's specific characteristics. The properties are described in the following table. 


Table 7 Elements used in graph styling 


Element Type Use 


Planar xsd:boolean If true, the graph edges do not cross (planar graph); if 
false they may cross 


directed xsd:boolean If true the graph is directed; if false it is not directed 


Grid xsd:boolean If true, the coordinates of vertices, crossings and 
bends have integer values, otherwise they may have 
decimal values 


minDistance xsd:double A recommendation for the minimmum distance 
between vertices and non-incident edges 


minAngle xsd:double A recommendation for the minimmum angle between 
consecutive incident edges (angular resolution) 


graphType xsd:enumeration The type of the graph. The value may be TREE or 
BICONNECTED 


drawingType xsd:enumeration the type of the drawing with respect to the 
orthogonality of edges. The value may be POLYLINE 
or ORTHOGONAL 


lineType xsd:enumeration Determines whether there will be any bent edges. The 
value may be STRAIGHT or BENT 


aestheticCriteria xsd:enumeration A recommendation for the general outline of the graph 
according to a particular aesthetic criteria. The value 
may be one of the following: MIN_CROSSINGS, 
MIN_AREA, MIN_BENDS, MAX_BENDS, 
UNIFORM_BENDS, MIN_SLOPES, 
MIN_EDGE_LENGTH, MAX_EDGE_LENGTH, 
UNIFORM_EDGE_LENGTH, 
MAX_ANGULAR_RESOLUTION, 
MIN_ASPECT_RATIO or MAX_SYMMETRIES 


21 Modularisation and Dependencies 


The base schemas for GML described above have been modularised so that application schemas that do not 
need the complete set of GML definitions may import only the topical subsets of GML that are required.  For 
example, a GML version 2 application schema migrating to GML version 3 without adding any new definitions 
could continue to import feature.xsd.   It would not import or require parsing of the new GML version 3 
definitions for coordinate reference systems, topology, coverages, dynamic features, default styles, and 
observations.  However, it would import and require parsing of all of the  basic types that have been added in 
GML version 3.   







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 251 
 


 


The modularisation of GML creates the dependencies among the GML base schemas shown in Figure 11 
below.  A dashed arrow in the figure indicates that the schema at the tail of the arrow depends upon the 
schema at the head of the arrow.  A dependency may occur where one schema <include>s another schema 
in the gml namespace.  For example, feature.xsd <include>s geometryBasic2d.xsd.  A dependency may 
also occur where one schema <import>s another schema for a namespace other than gml.   For example, 
gmlBase.xsd <import>s xlinks.xsd from the xlink namespace.   


There are now  seven schemas in GML upon which no other GML schemas depend.  These top level 
schemas are the roots of partially overlapping hierarchies of GML schemas:  


 observation.xsd  


 dynamicFeature.xsd  


 coverage.xsd 


 topology.xsd  


 defaultStyle.xsd  


 coordinateReferenceSystems.xsd  


 temporalReferenceSystems.xsd 


An application schema that needs definitions from more than one of these GML topical subset schema 
hierarchies can <import> gml.xsd and get all of the GML definitions.  Or it can contain multiple <import>s for 
just the appropriate gml schema documents, thereby excluding unwanted GML type definitions.  However, as 
specified in [XMLSchema-2] clause 4.2.3, it is open to applications to ignore all but the first <import> for a 
given namespace.   


To work around this problem, an application schema writer may create a custom top-level GML schema by 
copying the <schema> element from gml.xsd, and <including> just the appropriate gml schema documents.  
This custom top-level GML schema in the http://www.opengis.net/gml namespace named gml is then 
<import>ed into the application schema, which uses its own application-specific namespace.  For example, an 
application schema for features with topology could <import> a custom top-level GML schema that <include>s 
just feature.xsd and topology.xsd, thereby importing 17 fewer schemas than would have been imported using 
gml.xsd. 


However, when an application schema will be used in a processing environment that lacks CPU, memory 
and/or I/O bandwidth, for example, in a mobile hand-held device, an absolutely minimal <import> of GML 
definitions is often desired.  The custom top-level GML schema approach described above might bring in a 
unacceptably large number of unwanted definitions from each GML schema <include>d in the custom top-
level GML schema.  The solution is to create a single GML subset schema that contains exactly the required 
GML type and element definitions.However, creating such a GML subset schema by hand using a text or XML 
editor to cut and paste definitions is a tedious and error-prone process because it involves analyzing type 
definition dependencies across the many GML schema documents.  An automated approach is recommended 
instead.  An informative sample implementation of a GML schema subset tool is included in Annex F.  Subset 
schemas, however they are produced, are Profiles of GML as described in Clause 22.    


 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


252  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 


Figure 11  Schema Dependencies 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 253 
 


 


22 Profiles 


22.1 Profiles of GML and application schemas 


GML is a complex specification that is richly expressive. In general, an application need not exploit the entire 
specification, but may employ a subset of constructs corresponding to specific relevant requirements.  


Quoting from technical report ISO/IEC TR 10000-1:1998 Information technology - Framework and taxonomy 
of International Standardized Profiles - Part 1: General principles and documentation framework, we use this 
definition of a profile: 


Profile: A set of one or more base standards and/or [profiles], and, where applicable, the identification of 
chosen classes [(types, attributes and elements)], conforming subsets, options and parameters of those base 
standards, or [profiles] necessary to accomplish a particular function. 


Of course, this was defined for an OSI architecture model, so we must translate class to types, attributes and 
elements to apply this definition to XML Schema. There are several ways to implements this, and GML 
profiles uses a copy and delete approach. To create a profile, a developer might copy the applicable schema 
files from GML and simply delete any global types, elements and local optional particles that she does not 
need for her application schema. 


22.2 Definition of Profile 


A profile of GML can be defined to enhance interoperability and to curtail ambiguity by allowing only a specific 
subset of GML. Application schemas can then conform to such a profile in order to take advantage of any 
interoperability or performance advantages that it offers in comparison with a complete GML. Such profiles 
can be defined for application schemas that are included in other OGC specifications.  


There are cases where reduced functionality is acceptable, or where processing requirements compel use of 
a logical subset of GML. For example, applications that do not need to handle XLink attributes in any form can 
adhere to a specific profile that excludes them; the constraint in this case would be to not use links. Other 
cases might include defining constraints on the level of nesting allowed inside tags (i.e. tree depth), or only 
allowing features with homogeneous properties as members of a feature collection. In many cases, such 
constraints can be enforced via new schemas; others may be enforced through procedural agreements within 
an information community. 


22.3 Relation to application schema 


A profile can be the beginning of an application schema. For example, a location based service profile can 
limit the types of geometry to that used in LBS applications, and the LBS application schema can then add a 
PointCircle, PointEllipse and PointArc elements to accommodate the LIF CIRCLE, ELLIPSE and 
ARC elements, which are used to describe error estimates of mobile device location.  


The building of such application schemas is thus a two-part process. The profile acts as a restriction of GML 
to produce types and elements consistent with the complete GML 3 but potentially lacking in some optional 
particles. The application schema then uses these types as a common base, and uses them in new types and 
elements by extensions or inclusion. 


GML 3 selection & restriction GML profile extension & inclusion application schema  


22.4 Rules for elements and types in a profile 


Global profiled elements in a GML profile shall: 


a) Share the same name (and namespace) of a parent element in GML. 


b) Include all mandatory particles (subelements and attributes) of the parent element in GML. 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


254  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


c) Include no particle that is not in the parent element in GML. 


d) Have the same default values for attributes as the parent element in GML. 


e) Have a parallel substitution group hierarchy for named elements in both schemas.  


Global types in a GML profile shall: 


a) Share the same name (and namespace) of a parent type in GML. 


b) Include all mandatory particles (subelements and attributes) of the parent type in GML. 


c) Include no particle that is not in the parent type in GML. 


d) Have the same default values for attributes as the parent type in GML. 


e) Have a parallel derivation tree for named types in both schemas.  


Instance documents of a profile shall be valid against the full GML schema.   


Using the copy and delete metaphor described above, our mythic developer can: 


a) Delete global element and global types. 


b) Delete optional subelements from any types or elements 


c) Make optional subelements or attributes mandatory in any type or element (if a default value exist, it 
shall be eliminated or the schema validation will report an error  default values are only valid for 
optional particles) 


d) Restrict cardinality of any particle. 


None of the above will affect the validity of a document that is designed against the profile, but tested against 
the full GML schema. Our mythic developer cannot: 


a) Delete mandatory subelements from any types or elements. 


b) Make mandatory particles optional. 


c) Relax cardinality restrictions of any particle. 


d) Add or change a default or fixed value.  


Item d) is a bit subtler than the others are. Documents valid under the profile would still be valid under the full 
GML schema, but the interpretation of those documents would change. For example, if a profile specified a 
default coordinate reference system to be UTM, and the full schema specified a WGS84 geodesic (latitude, 
longitude) as the default CRS, then the interpretation of the file would change when moving from the profile to 
the full schema. 


22.5 Recommendations for application schemas using GML profiles 


In order that the profile within an application schema can be later extended to include other profiled GML 
elements, the following recommendations are made: 


a) Global elements that are not in a GML profile but are in an application schema using a GML profile 
should not have the same name as any element in the GML schemas.  







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 255 
 


 


b) Global types that are not in a GML profile but are in an application schema using a GML profile should 
not have the same name as any type in the GML schemas. 


If a type or element in an application schema is found to be of universal use, then the above conventions will 
aid the application schema from migrating that type or element from its own namespace to that of GML.  


The following recommendations are made simply as a bookkeeping convenience to those trying to understand 
the role of the profile in the application schema: 


a) Profiled elements and types should be included in a file structure that parallels that of GML. The exact 
naming convention of the parallelism is left to the application schema author.  


b) A reference to the appropriate GML schema file should be made in a comment near the beginning of 
the file. 


c) The profile should use the GML namespace (http://www.opengis.net/gml)   


22.6 Summary of Rules for GML profiles 


In summary, the rules for a profile: 


a) A profile of GML is a logical restriction of a subset of GML. 


b) A profile shall not change the name, definition, or data type of mandatory GML elements or attributes. 


c) The relevant schema or schemas that define a profile shall use in the core gml namespace 
http://www.opengis.net/gml. 


d) An application schema may extend and use types from the profile, but shall do so in its own 
namespace, and not use http://www.opengis.net/gml. 


The functional test of these rules is: 


In any instance document for an application schema using a GML profile will be valid against the same 
application schema if the GML profile is replaced by the complete GML schema. Further, the interpretation of 
that document would be the same regardless of which of the two schemas were used.  


23 Rules for Application Schemes 


23.1 GML Documents 


An XML document contains a single XML element as its root.  Several document types are permitted using 
GML, including: 


 A Feature 


 A Feature Collection 


 A Coverage (Coverages are Features so is a Feature Collection) 


 A Dictionary, including a Coordinate Reference System Dictionary or Units of Measure Dictionary 


 A Topological Complex 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


256  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


The standard methods for XML documents based on W3C XML Schema, provide that the XML namespaces 
used in a document are declared as attributes within the document, and the location of schema documents 
that provide the source components for each namespace may be indicated.  


For a GML document, the source of the components describing the primary components within the document  
is a GML Application Schema.   Both the document type and the associated application schema are described 
in this clause. 


23.2 GML Application Schemas 


A GML Application Schema is an XML Schema, conforming to the rules outlined in this clause, that describes 
one or more types of geographic objects, components of geographic objects, or meta data, including 
dictionaries and definitions, used in the definition of geographic objects..  A GML Application Schema defines 
a vocabulary for a particular domain of discourse by defining and describing the terms of that vocabulary (see 
ISO 19109) as follows.   


An application schema directly uses concrete GML elements and attributes whose names and content models 
accurately represent components of the vocabulary it defines, e.g. gml:location, gml:name, gml:description, 
gml:Observation,  gml:id, gml:Dictionary, gml:FeatureCollection.  


An application schema declares new elements and attributes in its own namespace using GML types when 
the vocabulary it defines needs to include different names for the same content models to distinguish their 
semantic roles.  The element declared in the application schema will be in a different namespace, and may be 
used in an instance document.  E.g. gml:EnvelopeType may be used unmodified as the content model for an 
element xmml:Interval.   


An application schema derives new types in its own namespace by extension of GML types when the 
vocabulary it defines needs to include components with additional, domain-specific properties. 


An application schema derives new types in its own namespace by restriction of GML types when the 
vocabulary it defines needs to include more specialized versions of GML types that restrict the cardinality or 
type of their properties. 


An application schema declares new elements and attributes in its own namespace using types it has defined 
to give vocabulary-specific names to their content models.  


An application schema declares new elements that are assigned to a substitution group whose head is an 
abstract or concrete GML element.  The element declared in the application schema may then appear in 
instance documents in place of the substitution group head and be conformant to the content model that 
refers to the substitution group head.  Note that in order to be a valid member of a substitution group, the type 
of the element shall be validly derived from the type of the element which is the head of the substitution group.  
All abstract elements in the GML schemas are only useful acting as the heads of substitution groups.   E.g. 
gml:_GML, gml:_Feature,_gml:_Geometry, gml:_TimeObject  


All GML Application Schemas are constructed, using the general rules of this clause and its sub clauses, from 
one or more of the core GML schemas defined in Clauses 7 to 20. 


In GML 2, GML Application Schemas were restricted to the development of vocabularies of geographic 
features and all application schemas were based on the feature.xsd.   


In GML 3, this concept is extended and several different types of application schemas can be constructed  
including Feature Schemas, Geometry Schemas, Topology Schemas, Temporal Schemas, Coordinate 
System Schemas, Coverage Schemas, Observation Schemas, and Value Schemas.  Additional rules for the 
construction of  schemas are discussed in the following clauses. 


GML also allows the derivation of many other kinds of elements such as new units of measure, new geometry 
properties and new geometries.  While these elements can be packaged into separate schemas they are 
viewed as subordinate to the schema categories of this clause.  Any conformant GML application schema 
shall be one of the schema types listed below, or be a schema document that complies to the rules from the 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 257 
 


 


respective schema clause.  It is thus permissible to create a GML application schema that defines Features, 
Coverages and Values, so long as this schema satisfies the rules of Clauses 23.3, 23.8 and 23.9. 


23.2.1 Target Namespace 


An application schema shall declare a target namespace.  This is the namespace in which the terms for 
objects and properties of the vocabulary defined by the application schema live. This shall not be the GML 
namespace (http://www.opengis.net/gml). It is conventional for the namespace identifier  to be a URL 
controlled by the application schema authors organization.  A target namespace is declared in an application 
schema using the targetNamespace attribute of the schema element from XML Schema. 


An application schema may be comprised of multiple schema documents that all declare the same target 
namespace.  Note that a top level schema document in such a modularised application schema should  
directly or indirectly include the others to avoid the XML application processing limitatations discussed in 
section 21 Modularisation and Dependencies above. 


23.2.2 Import GML Schema  


An application schema shall import all of the components from GML 3 that it directly or indirectly uses to 
define its vocabularyThe required import of a specific gml schema in clauses 23.*.2 below may be provided 
indirectly via the import of another schema in the namespace for gml that includes the required gml schema.  
For example, the import of gml.xsd would satisfy any of these schema import requirements.  In addition, the 
required import of a gml schema may be provided by the import of an equivalent subset schema as described 
in clause 22, or by the import of an equivalent schema from a GML profile that defines the complex type of the 
document root element.  These are all equivalent schemas with respect to satisfying the schema import 
requirements.  For example: 


<import namespace="http://www.opengis.net/gml" schemaLocation="../ gml.xsd"/>   
 
Note that the <import> element specifies that the components described in gml.xsd are associated with the 
GML namespace http://www.opengis.net/gml.  This namespace identifier shall match the target namespace 
specified in the schema being imported in order to ensure XML Schema validity.   


The path (schemaLocation) to the imported GML schema can be to a local copy of the document, or may be a 
URI reference to a copy of the schema document in some remote repository, such as the repository 
http://schemas.opengis.net/ on the OGC web site. 


23.2.3 Object Type Derivation 


An object type declared by an application schema shall not violate any XLM Schema derivation restrictions 
imposed by a  final attribute on its base GML type. 


An object type defined by an application schema shall derive directly from the most specialized GML object 
type that can serve as the base for its content model while preserving semantic consistency and increasing 
type specialization.     


23.2.4 Elements Representing Objects 


An application schema shall declare a global element for any object type that is to serve as the root element in 
a GML instance document. 


23.2.5 Property Type Derivation 


A property type defined by an application schema to contain or reference a single GML object may be derived 
from gml:AssociationType, or may follow the pattern of gml:AssociationType.  







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


258  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


A property type defined by an application schema to contain or reference a homogeneous collection of GML 
objects shall be derived from gml:ArrayAssociationType. 


23.2.6 Elements Representing Properties 


Elements representing properties of GML objects may be declared as global elements in an application 
schema, or they may be declared locally within object content models (type definitions).  Note that elements in 
the content of complex types that are defined with local names in an application schema will prevent 
derivation by restriction in another namespace.  Such complex types are appropriate for elements intended for 
use as is in their own namespace, and should be declared to be final=restriction.  Elements in the content 
of complex types defined by reference to global elements support derivation by restriction in another 
namespace, allowing restriction of cardinality, and/or replacement by a member of a substitution group.  Such 
complex types designed for derivation by restriction are appropriate library types for elements in substitution 
groups that cross namespaces.  


If the value of the property is expected to be available elsewhere, it is necessary for the property element in an 
instance to provide a pointer to the value, so the property shall support association by-reference.  This is 
accomplished using xlink attributes, and in the GML application schema the XML type for the property shall 
include gml:AssociationAttributeGroup.   


If the value of the property is expected to be represented in place, the content model (XML schema type) for 
the property shall support this.  The property element shall either have XML Schema simpleContent of the 
appropriate simpleType, or it shall have complexContent comprising a single child element of the appropriate 
type.   


If the value of the property is expected to be available either elsewhere, or represented in place, then the type 
for the property element shall support both methods.  The type for the property element shall have the 
gml:AssociationAttributeGroup, in which all members are optional, and the child element shall have 
minOccurs=0 so that in an instance document the property element may be empty if it carries an xlink.  Note 
that the value of a property of an ArrayAssociationType shall be represented in place.   


If the last pattern is used, and it is desired to prohibit the possibility of both xlink attributes and content, or 
neither, then this constraint should be recorded as a normative directive in an <annotation> element on the 
element declaration in the application schema.  The directive may be expressed as prose, or it may be 
expressed using a formal notation such as Schematron.   


23.3 Schemas defining Features and Feature Collections 


Features and Feature collections are the primary view of geospatial information supported by GML, and are 
particularly useful in modeling real world geography or in defining message types for geographic web 
services.  A Feature in GML models a real world object or concept and provides an element (feature type) and 
an associated set of properties describing that type also encoded as elements.  


Feature application schemas define geographic features and feature collections for a specific application 
domain or community .  These application schemas shall obey the additional rules described in the following 
clauses. 


23.3.1 Target Namespace 


The application schema shall declare a target namespace as described in section 22.3.1 Target Namespace,  
in which the terms (features, feature collections) of the vocabulary live. 


23.3.2 Import feature.xsd 


The application schema shall import the necessary components from GML 3 as described in section 22.3.2 
Import GML Schemafor example as follows: 


<import namespace="http://www.opengis.net/gml" schemaLocation="../ feature.xsd"/> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 259 
 


 


 


23.3.3 Feature Type Derivation 


All feature types declared in an application schema shall derive either directly or indirectly from 
gml:AbstractFeatureType. 


The abstract type gml:AbstractFeatureCollectionType may be used as the base type for feature collection 
types. Alternatively, feature collection types may be specified following the pattern used in this abstract type 
(directly or indirectly derive from gml:AbstractFeatureType and contain a feature-valued property).  


23.3.4 Elements Representing Features 


All geographic features and feature collections in the application schema shall be declared as global elements 
in the schema, i.e. they shall be immediate child elements of the XML Schema <schema> element.   


The name of an element that instantiates a GML feature shall be its Feature Type, in the sense described in 
ISO 19109 and 19110. 


23.3.5 Application Features are Features 


A feature defined in an application schema shall conform to the rules respecting GML features as described in 
Clause 8.  These include in particular: 


 The name of feature element is the semantic type of the feature. 


 The children of a feature are always properties that describe the feature, and such properties can only be 
encoded as child elements. Properties cannot be encoded as XML attributes. 


23.3.6 GML Feature Collection Document 


A GML application may use a gml:FeatureCollection to contain features defined in an application schema 
when there is no requirement to restrict the inclusion of other types of features.  A GML Application Schema 
may define specialised feature collection types and global elements to serve as the root elements for 
documents describing Feature Collections specific to the application domain where there is a requirement to 
exclude features not defined in that domain.   


23.4 Schemas defining Geometries 


23.4.1 Target Namespace 


The application schema shall declare a target namespace as described in section 22.3.1 Target Namespace,  
in which the terms (geometries) of the vocabulary live. 


23.4.2 Import a GML geometry schema 


The application schema shall import the necessary components from GML 3 as described in section 22.3.2 
Import GML Schema, for example as follows: 


<import namespace="http://www.opengis.net/gml" schemaLocation="../geometryComplexes.xsd"/> 
 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


260  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


23.4.3 User-defined Geometry Types and Geometry Property Types 


23.4.3.1 User-defined Geometry Types 


Authors of application schemas may create their own geometry types if GML lacks the desired construct. To 
do this, authors shall ensure that these concrete geometry and geometry collection types are subtyped (either 
directly or indirectly) from the corresponding GML type: AbstractGeometryType. 


EXAMPLE The following complex type definition in an application schema extends the PointType of GML and adds 
a bearing (e.g. for the orientation of a symbol in portrayal). 


 <complexType name="PointWithBearingType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base=" gml:PointType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element name="bearing" type="gml:AngleType"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 


Any user-defined geometry subtypes shall inherit the elements and attributes of the base GML geometry types 
without restriction, but may extend these base types to meet application requirements, such as providing a 
finer degree of interoperability with legacy systems and data sets. 


23.4.3.2 User-defined Geometry Property Types 


Furthermore, authors of application schemas may create their own geometry property types that encapsulate 
geometry types they have defined according to clause 9.1. They shall ensure that these properties follow the 
pattern used by gml:GeometryPropertyType. For standard properties and gml:GeometryArrayPropertyType for 
array properties. The target type shall be a bonafide geometry construct. 


A geometry property type may be a restriction of GeometryPropertyType, but this is not a requirement. 
Nevertheless, every geometry property shall follow the pattern of this type. It is allowed to support the choice 
between a by-value or a by-reference semantic or to restrict the use to either by-value (prohibit the use of the 
Xlink attributes) or by-reference (prohibit the containment of the geometry in the feature). 


A geometry array property type may be a restriction of GeometryArrayPropertyType, but this is not a 
requirement. Nevertheless, every geometry property shall follow the pattern of this type. All geometry 
elements in the array are contained in the feature, only by-value semantics is supported by array properties. 


EXAMPLE The following complex type definitions in an application schema define a standard property type for an 
user-defined geometry type and an array property type for the same geometry type. 


 <complexType name="MyGeometryPropertyType"> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="foo:PointWithBearingType"  minOccurs="0"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup" /> 
 </complexType> 
 
 <complexType name="MyGeometryArrayPropertyType"> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="foo:PointWithBearingType" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded" /> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 261 
 


 


23.5 Schemas defining Topologies 


23.5.1 Target Namespace 


The application schema shall declare a target namespace as described in section 22.3.1 Target Namespace,  
in which the terms (topologies) of the vocabulary live. 


23.5.2 Import topology.xsd 


The application schema shall import the necessary components from GML 3 as described in section 22.3.2 
Import GML Schema, for example as follows: 


<import namespace="http://www.opengis.net/gml" schemaLocation="../topology.xsd"/> 
 


23.5.3 User-defined Topology Types and Topology Property Types 


23.5.3.1 User-defined Topology Types 


Authors of application schemas may create their own topology types if GML lacks the desired construct. To do 
this, authors shall ensure that these concrete topology types are subtyped (either directly or indirectly) from 
the corresponding GML type: AbstractTopologyType. 


Any user-defined topology subtypes shall inherit the elements and attributes of the base GML topology types 
without restriction, but may extend these base types to meet application requirements, such as providing a 
finer degree of interoperability with legacy systems and data sets. 


23.5.3.2 User-defined Topology Property Types 


Furthermore, authors of application schemas may create their own (directed) topology property types that 
encapsulate topology types they have defined according to section 13. They shall ensure that these properties 
follow the pattern used by the gml property type for the base gml Topology type, e.g. 
gml:DirectedNodePropertyType, or gml:TopoVolumePropertyType, or gml:TopoComplexMemberType. The 
target type shall be a bonafide topology construct. 


A topology property type may be a restriction of a Topology PropertyType, but this is not a requirement. 
Nevertheless, every topology property shall follow the pattern of this type.  


23.6 Schemas defining Time 


23.6.1 Target Namespace 


The application schema shall declare a target namespace as described in section 22.3.1 Target Namespace,  
in which the terms of the vocabulary live. 


23.6.2 Import temporal.xsd 


The application schema shall import the necessary components from GML 3 as described in section 22.3.2 
Import GML Schema, for example as follows: 


<import namespace="http://www.opengis.net/gml" schemaLocation="../temporal.xsd"/> 
 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


262  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


23.6.3 User-defined Temporal Types and Temporal Property Types 


23.6.3.1 User-defined Temporal Types 


Authors of application schemas may create their own temporal types if GML lacks the desired construct. To do 
this, authors shall ensure that these concrete temporal types are subtyped (either directly or indirectly) from 
the corresponding GML type: AbstractTimeObjectType. 


Any user-defined temporal subtypes shall inherit the elements and attributes of the base GML temporal types 
without restriction, but may extend these base types to meet application requirements, such as providing a 
finer degree of interoperability with legacy systems and data sets. 


23.6.3.2 User-defined Temporal Property Types 


Furthermore, authors of application schemas may create their own temporal property types that encapsulate 
temporal types they have defined according to section 13. They shall ensure that these properties follow the 
pattern used by the gml property type for the base GML temporal type, e.g. gml:TimeInstantPropertyType. 
The target type shall be a bonafide temporal construct. 


A temporal property type may be a restriction of a Temporal PropertyType, but this is not a requirement. 
Nevertheless, every temporal property shall follow the pattern of this type.  


23.7 Schemas defining Coordinate Reference Systems  


Many of the concrete XML elements defined in the CRS Schemas can be used without Application Schemas, 
whenever no content extensions or restrictions are needed. An Application Schema shall be used whenever 
element contents extension is required, and should be used in most other cases to specify needed 
restrictions. That is, an Application Schema should be defined to extend and/or restrict elements as needed 
for a specific application, or a set of applications, to: 


a) Add elements to contents of existing elements, for recording additional data about that item needed 
for that application. 


b) Restrict the multiplicity of current contents elements, to eliminate flexibility not needed and perhaps 
confusing for that application. 


c) Use a different element name, to be more easily understood in that specific application, primarily for 
elements that will be instantiated many times. 


d) Specify standard contents and contents patterns for selected elements and attributes, as needed to 
improve interoperability. 


e) Specify standard XML and other documents to be referenced or otherwise used, as needed to 
improve interoperability. 


Application Schemas can thus be used for XML document contents extensions, restrictions, or both. Contents 
extension is expected to be often used to record additional data needed for applications. Contents restriction 
is expected to be frequently used to restrict contents, in order to increase interoperability and reduce 
ambiguity when greater flexibility is not needed for applications. Extensions of existing concrete elements can 
be defined by extending that concrete element. In many cases, restrictions of existing concrete elements can 
be done by extending the abstract element from which that concrete element is derived, by adding somewhat 
different but corresponding extensions.  


An Application Schema can specify a single top level element for use in an XML document, with the XML 
elements and types that it uses. That single top level XML element can be an object with identity, but this is 
not required. Such an Application Schema will import and build upon one or more of the six XML Schemas 
specified in this document. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 263 
 


 


Application Schemas could define additional concrete elements using or extending other abstract elements, if 
needed. However, an additional concrete element using or extending an abstract element should not be 
defined if that concrete element is largely similar to an existing element, and thus probably should extend or 
use an existing concrete element. In many cases, the existing concrete elements that use an abstract element 
are believed to be largely exhaustive. This is particularly true when the existing concrete elements include one 
element that is quite general, such as the elements EngineeringCRS, DerivedCRS, EngineeringDatum, 
UserDefinedCS, OperationParameter, and OperationParameterGroup. 


The Conversion, Transformation, ParameterValue, and ParameterValueGroup elements can be used for well-
known coordinate operation methods, especially when only one instance of that element is needed for that 
operation method. However, these elements should not be used for well-known coordinate operation methods 
when many instances of that element are needed for one operation method. Instead, an Application Schema 
that defines operation-method-specialized element names and contents should be prepared for each such 
operation method. Subclauses F.3 and F.4 provide examples of such Application Schemas. For 
interoperability, a suitable geospatial information community should standardize each such Application 
Schema. 


NOTE  This use of Application Schemas follows the patterns used in Feature Application Schemas. 


23.7.1 Target Namespace 


The application schema shall declare a target namespace as described in section 22.3.1 Target Namespace,  
in which the terms (coordinate reference systems) of the vocabulary live. 


23.7.2 Import coordinateReferenceSystem.xsd 


The application schema shall import the necessary components from GML 3 as described in section 22.3.2 
Import GML Schema, for example as follows: 


  <import namespace="http://www.opengis.net/gml" schemaLocation="../coordinateReferenceSystem.xsd"/> 
 


23.8 Schemas defining Coverages 


Coverages are an alternative view of geospatial information.  This view focuses on the variation of a property 
or properties across a domain, so is particularly useful in analysis. 


This clause defines the rules for the construction of application schemas for coverages. Note that coverages 
are features and hence the rules of section 23.3 above  apply also to coverages. 


23.8.1 Target Namespace 


The application schema shall declare a target namespace as described in section 22.3.1 Target Namespace,  
in which the terms (coordinate reference systems) of the vocabulary live. 


23.8.2 Import coverage.xsd 


The application schema shall import the necessary components from GML 3 as described in section 22.3.2 
Import GML Schema, for example as follows: 


    <import namespace="http://www.opengis.net/gml" schemaLocation="../coverage.xsd"/> 
 


23.8.3 Coverages shall derive from gml:AbstractDiscreteCoverageType or 
gml:AbstractContinuousCoverageType 


All geographic coverages in the application schema shall be declared as global elements in the schema, that 
is they shall be child elements of the XML Schema <schema> element.  The content model for such global 
elements shall derive by extension either directly or indirectly from gml:AbstractDiscreteCoverageType or 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


264  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


gml:AbstractContinuousCoverageType.  Note that these types  derive indirectly from gml:AbstractFeatureType 
and hence the condition of the feature model is satisfied. 


The coverage.xsd provides the specific coverage types (MultiPointCoverage, MultiCurveCoverage, 
MultiSurfaceCoverage, MultiSurfaceCoverage, GriddedCoverage, RectifiedGridCoverage) and application 
coverages can derive from any of these as well. 


23.8.4 Range Parameters shall be Derived from gml:ValueType 


The coverage application schema shall define or import the definitions for all Range Parameters.  Each such 
Range Parameter shall be substitutable for gml:_Value as defined in the valueObjects.xsd schema.  Note that 
this allows the Range Parameter to take on a wide range of types.  Note further that the value.xsd provides 
several abstractsub- sub-types that are substitutable for gml:_Value, including gml:_ScalarValue and 
gml:_ValueList. Concrete scalar and value list types, and substitution group head elements, are also provided 
(substitutable for gml:_ScalarValue or gml:_ValueList) and include: 


 gml:Category   (gml:CodeType) 


 gml:CategoryList  (gml:CodeOrNullListType) 


 gml:Quantity   (gml:MeasureType) 


 gml:QuantityList  (gml:MeasureOrNullListType) 


 gml:Count   (gml:CountType) 


 gml:Boolean   (gml:BooleanType) 


To define the Range Parameters in a Coverage Application schema, refer to the valueObjects.xsd schema 
described in Annex C. 


Typical examples of the use of the value types in the development of a GML coverage can be found in the 
examples clause for coverages Clause 19.3, and are summarized in Table 8. 


Table 8  Range Parameters for Coverage Schemas 


Coverage Range Parameter Definition in GML 


Temperature 
Distribution 
(weather) 


Temperature Would be derived from 
gml:MeasureOrNullListType and made 
substitutable for gml:measure defined in the 
measures.xsd. 


Soil type 
distribution 


(agronomy) 


Soil type Would be derived from gml:Category and 
made substitutable for gml_Category.  Weak 
reference to an enumeration of soil types. 


Multi-spectral 
optical image 


(remote sensing) 


Reflectance in each 
spectral band. 


Would be derived from  gml:QuantityListType 
and made substitutable for  gml:QuantityList. 


Distribution of 
West Nile Virus 
cases. 


(epidemiology) 


CaseCount Would be derived from  integerOrNullList, and 
made substitutable for gml:CountList.. 


Distribution of 
West Nile Virus 
cases. 


(epidemiology) 


CaseCount Would be derived from  integerOrNullList, and 
made substitutable for gml:CountList. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 265 
 


 


 


23.8.5 Coverage Document 


A coverage document is defined by a corresponding coverage schema. The root element of this document 
shall be a coverage defined in this schema or may be a feature collection whose members are coverages as 
described in Clause 8.2.7. 


23.9 Schemas defining Observations 


An observation in GML is a kind of feature that represents an act of observing or observation event.  This may 
be associated with a measurement obtained from some type of instrument, or may just be a photograph 
acquired by a travelling tourist. 


This clause describes how to create an observation application schema. 


An observation application schema defines one or more types of observations according to the following rules. 


23.9.1 Target Namespace 


The application schema shall declare a target namespace as described in section 22.3.1 Target Namespace,  
in which the terms (observation) of the vocabulary live. 


23.9.2 Import observation.xsd 


The application schema shall import the necessary components from GML 3 as described in section 22.3.2 
Import GML Schema, for example as follows: 


  <import namespace="http://www.opengis.net/gml" schemaLocation="../ observation.xsd"/> 
 


23.9.3 Observations shall derive from gml:ObservationType 


All observation types (kinds of observations) defined in the application schema shall be declared as global 
elements in the schema, that is they shall be child elements of the XML Schema <schema> element.  The 
content model for such global elements shall derive by extension either directly or indirectly from 
gml:ObservationType. 


23.9.4 Observation Collections shall derive from gml:CollectionType 


All observation collections in the application schema shall be declared as global elements in the schema, that 
is they shall be child elements of the XML Schema <schema> element.  The content model for such global 
elements shall derive by extension either directly or indirectly from gml:CollectionType. 


23.9.5 Observations are Features 


An observation defined in an application schema shall conform to the rules respecting GML features as 
described in Clause 8.  These include in particular: 


a) Observation semantic type information can ONLY be carried by elements.  The following is not valid 
GML. 


<abc:Measurement type =WaterQuality>  </abc:Measurement> 


b) The children of a observation are always properties that describe the observation, and such properties 
can only be encoded as child elements. Properties cannot be encoded as XML attributes. 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


266  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


c) No child of an observation can itself be a feature or other GML object (i.e. one derived from 
gml:AbstractGMLType).  Thus no child of a observation can be feature, geometry, topology, coordinate 
reference system etc. 


23.9.6 Observation Collection Document 


Corresponding to a Observation Collection document there shall be a GML Application Schema that defines 
the single root element of that Observation Collection document.  Note that this does not imply that this 
Observation Collection is defined by a single application schema. The features referenced from the 
Observation Collection element may be contained in any number of other schemas and these may define 
observations only, observation collections or any combination of the same. 


An observation collection could be used, for example, to encode a set of measurements from one or more 
sensor devices. 


23.10 Schemas defining Dictionaries and Definitions 


A common requirement is to collect a set of definitions together into a dictionary, in order that a term may be 
referred to many times, while its (potentially lengthy) definition is only recorded once.  The kind of information 
that might form the content of a dictionary are units of measure, coordinate reference systems, observable-
types or measurands, parties including individuals or organizations.   


In order to support this, some generic components for dictionaries and definitions are provided in GML 3.  The 
basic Definition is a simple element which supports a prose description.  This may be used directly for simple 
non-parameterised definitions, or may serve as the basis for specialized definition elements.   


The basic Dictionary is a bag of Definitions.  It may be used as a container for an arbitrary set of Definitions or 
elements that are in the Definition substitution group.  It may also serve as the basis for a specialized 
Dictionary restricted to contain only certain types of definition.   


One set of specialized definitions is built in to GML 3, for units of measure, and serves as an example of how 
to derive specialized definition components.   


This clause describes how to create an application schema for definitions. 


An application schema for definitions defines one or more types of definitions according to the following rules. 


23.10.1 Target Namespace 


The application schema shall declare a target namespace as described in section 22.3.1 Target Namespace,  
in which the terms (dictionaries, definitions) of the vocabulary live. 


23.10.2 Import dictionary.xsd 


The application schema shall import the necessary components from GML 3 as described in section 22.3.2 
Import GML Schema, for example as follows: 


  <import namespace="http://www.opengis.net/gml" schemaLocation="../dictionary.xsd"/> 
 


23.10.3 Definitions shall derive from gml:DefinitionType 


All definitions in the application schema shall be declared as global elements in the schema, i.e. they shall be 
immediate child elements of the XML Schema <schema> element.  The content model for such global 
elements shall derive either directly or indirectly from gml:DefinitionType. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 267 
 


 


23.10.4 Dictionaries shall derive from gml:DictionaryType 


A dictionary in the application schema shall be declared as a global element in the schema, that is it shall be a 
child element of the XML Schema <schema> element.  The content model for such global elements shall 
derive either directly or indirectly from gml:DictionaryType. 


23.11 Schemas defining Values 


GML allows for user defined value types.  Such values types can be used to express the property types of 
features and other types of GML objects. The basic root types for user-defined values are defined in 
basicTypes.xsd. An alternative form for the expression of values is contained in valueObjects.xsd.  This is 
used mainly to provide values for the gml:resultOf parameter for an observation. 


23.11.1 Target Namespace 


The application schema shall declare a target namespace as described in section 22.3.1 Target Namespace,  
in which the terms (values) of the vocabulary live. 


23.11.2 Import valueObjects.xsd or basicTypes.xsd 


The application schema shall import the necessary components from GML 3 as described in section 22.3.2 
Import GML Schema, for example as follows: 


  <import namespace="http://www.opengis.net/gml" schemaLocation="../valueObjects.xsd"/> 
 


23.11.3 Construction of New Value Types 


New value types can be created by derivation (typically by restriction) from any of the root types shown in 
Table 9. 


Table 9   


Content Model Description 


MeasureType A numerical quantity with a unit of measure (UOM) 


CategoryType A classification 


CountType A count of occurrences, incidences etc. 


 


Some standard value types can be found in the measures.xsd schema. 


 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


268  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


Annex A 
(normative) 


 
Abstract Test Suite 


A.1  Conformance Class A. Conformance of the XML Implementation of GML data 


A.1.1  Existence of an applicable GML application schema. 


a) Test Purpose: To verify the existence of a GML application schema applicable to the GML data set. 


b) Test Method: Ensure that the application schema applicable to a particular GML data set exists. 


c) Reference: 


d) Test Type: Basic Test 


A.1.2  Conformance of the applicable application schema 


a) Test Purpose: To verify that the applicable GML application schema is conformant to this 
specification. 


b) Test Method: Test whether the application schema satisfies all the tests specified in the Conformance 
Class B.  


c) Reference: 


d) Test Type: Capability Test. 


A.1.3  Conformance of the data set 


a) Test Purpose: To verify the validity of the GML data against the conformant GML application schema. 


b) Test Method: Validate GML Data set against corresponding GML application schema tested in the 
steps A1.1-A1.2.  The process may be using an appropriate software tool for validation or be a 
manual process that checks all relevant definitions from the GML and application schemas. 


c) Reference: 


d) Test Type: Capability Test 


A.2  Conformance Class B. Conformance of the XML Implementation of GML 
Application Schema 


A.2.1  XMLSchema valid 


a) Test Purpose: To verify the conformance of the GML application schema to the XML and 
XMLSchema specifications. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 269 
 


 


b) Test Method: Validate GML application schema using appropriate process for validation. The process 
may be using an appropriate software tool for validation or be a manual process that checks all 
relevant rules from the XML 1.0 and XMLSchema 1.0 specifications.  


c) Reference: 


d) Test Type: Capability Test 


A.2.2  GML model valid 


a) Test Purpose: To verify the validity against GML model. 


b) Test Method: Ensure that the schema conforms to Clause 23 of this specification (Rules for creating 
GML Application Schemas) and 22(Profiles).  


c) Reference: 


d) Test Type: Basic Test 


A.3  Conformance Class C. Conformance of the GML Interface Implementation for 
GML Data 


A.3.1  Serialization capability test 


a) Test Purpose: To verify the existence of the serialization operation of the implementation. 


b) Test Method: Verify that the implementation implements the serialize operation that produces GML in 
XML format. 


c) Reference: 


d) Test Type: Basic Test 


A.3.2  Serialization validity test 


a) Test Purpose: To verify that the result of the implementation serialization is conformant with this 
specification. 


b) Test Method: Verify that the result of the serialization of the implementation conforms to this 
specification according to the Conformance Class A (A.1) 


c) Reference: 


d) Test Type: Capability Test 


A.3.3  Transforming to and from XML format 


a) Test Purpose: To verify that the creation of  implementations  objects from GML source in XML  
format, if that capability exists, performs valid function. 


b) Test Method: If it is possible to create implementations objects from GML source in XML format, 
verify that successive actions of object creation and serialization produce (test A.3.2) the result that is 
identical to the source (no loss of information). 


c) Reference: 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


270  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


d) Test Type: Capability Test 


A.4  Conformance Class D. Conformance of the GML Interface Implementation for 
GML Application Schema 


A.4.1  Serialization capability test 


a) Test Purpose: To verify the existence of the serialization operation of the implementation. 


b) Test Method: Verify that the implementation implements the serialize operation that produces GML 
Application Schema in XML Schema format. 


c) Reference: 


d) Test Type: Basic Test 


A.4.2  Serialization validity test 


a) Test Purpose: To verify that the result of the implementation serialization is conformant with this 
specification. 


b) Test Method: Verify that the result of the serialization of the implementation conforms to this 
specification according to the Conformance Class B (A.2) 


c) Reference: 


d) Test Type: Capability Test 


A.4.3  Transforming to and from XML format 


a) Test Purpose: To verify that the creation of   implementation schema objects from GML Application 
Schema source in XML  format, if that capability exists, performs valid function. 


b) Test Method: If it is possible to create implementations schema objects from GML Application 
Schema source in XML format, verify that successful actions of object creation and serialization 
produce (test A.4.2) the result that is identical to the source (without loss of information). 


c) Reference: 


d) Test Type: Capability Test 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 271 
 


 


Annex B 
(normative) 


 
Conformance 


B.1  GML Object Rules 


This clause summarizes the rules for the detection of GML objects.  These rules specify the necessary and 
sufficient conditions for an element. 


B.1.1  GML Objects 


An element x is a GML object (of some kind) iff its content model derives ultimately from 
gml:AbstractGMLType, so that it may have identity provided by a gml:id attribute. 


An element x is a more specific kind of GML object iff its content model derives ultimately from a more specific 
GML complex type derived from AbstractGMLType.  For example, an element x is a GML feature iff its content 
model derives ultimately from gml:AbstractFeatureType.  An element x is a GML geometry iff its content 
model derives ultimately from gml:AbstractGeometryType.  And so on.   


B.1.2  GML Properties 


An element p is a property of a GML object x iff p is a child of x in the XML sense. 


B.2  Application Schemas 


Writers of application schemas shall conform to the rules stated in clauses 7 - 23.   


B.3  Conformance Classes 


B.3.1  Conformance Requirements 


Conformance with this specification shall be checked using all the relevant tests specified in Annex A. The 
framework, concepts, and methodology for testing, and the criteria to be achieved to claim conformance, are 
specified in ISO 19105: Geographic information  Conformance and Testing. 


This OpenGIS specification defines four conformance classes: A, B, C and D. Any product claiming 
conformance with one of these classes shall pass all the requirements described in the corresponding 
abstract test suite specified in the Annex A. 


1. Class A: Conformance of the XML Implementation of GML Data Set. 
This class applies to GML data encoded using XML. 


2. Class B: Conformance of the XML Implementation of GML Application Schemas. 
This class applies to GML application schemas encoded using XML Schema schema description 
language. 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


272  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


3. Class C: Conformance of Interface Implementations for GML Data. 
This class applies to implementations of software interfaces that consume and/or produce GML data. 


4. Class D: Conformance of Interface Implementations for GML Application Schemas. 
This class applies to implementations of software interfaces that consume and/or produce GML 
application schemas. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 273 
 


 


Annex C 
(normative) 


 
GML Schemas 


C.1 basicTypes.xsd 


<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
<schema targetNamespace="http://www.opengis.net/gml" xmlns:gml="http://www.opengis.net/gml" 
xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink" xmlns:sch="http://www.ascc.net/xml/schematron" 
xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" elementFormDefault="qualified" version="3.1.0"> 
 <annotation> 
  <appinfo source="urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-xsd:basicTypes:v3.1.0">basicTypes.xsd</appinfo> 
  <documentation> 
    Generic simpleContent components for use in GML  
    </documentation> 
 </annotation> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <simpleType name="NullEnumeration"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> Some common reasons for a null value:    
    
        innapplicable - the object does not have a value 
        missing - The correct value is not readily available to the sender of this data.   
                           Furthermore, a correct value may not exist. 
        template - the value will be available later 
        unknown - The correct value is not known to, and not computable by, the sender of this data.  
                           However, a correct value probably exists. 
        withheld - the value is not divulged  
         
        other:reason - as indicated by "reason" string 
         
        Specific communities may agree to assign more strict semantics when these terms are used in a particular context.   
      </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <union> 
   <simpleType> 
    <restriction base="string"> 
     <enumeration value="inapplicable"/> 
     <enumeration value="missing"/> 
     <enumeration value="template"/> 
     <enumeration value="unknown"/> 
     <enumeration value="withheld"/> 
    </restriction> 
   </simpleType> 
   <simpleType> 
    <restriction base="string"> 
     <pattern value="other:\w{2,}"/> 
    </restriction> 
   </simpleType> 
  </union> 
 </simpleType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <simpleType name="NullType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Utility type for null elements.  The value may be selected from one of the enumerated tokens, or 
may be a URI in which case this should identify a resource which describes the reason for the null. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <union memberTypes="gml:NullEnumeration anyURI"/> 
 </simpleType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


274  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 <element name="Null" type="gml:NullType"/> 
 <!-- ===================================================== --> 
 <simpleType name="SignType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Utility type used in various places  
      - e.g. to indicate the direction of topological objects; 
      "+" for forwards, or "-" for backwards.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <restriction base="string"> 
   <enumeration value="-"/> 
   <enumeration value="+"/> 
  </restriction> 
 </simpleType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <simpleType name="booleanOrNull"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Union of the XML Schema boolean type and the GML Nulltype.  An element which uses this type 
may have content which is either a boolean {0,1,true,false} or a value from Nulltype</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <union memberTypes="gml:NullEnumeration boolean anyURI"/> 
 </simpleType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <simpleType name="booleanOrNullList"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>XML List based on the union type defined above.  An element declared with this type contains a 
space-separated list of boolean values {0,1,true,false} with null values interspersed as needed</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <list itemType="gml:booleanOrNull"/> 
 </simpleType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <simpleType name="booleanList"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>XML List based on XML Schema boolean type.  An element of this type contains a space-separated 
list of boolean values {0,1,true,false}</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <list itemType="boolean"/> 
 </simpleType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <simpleType name="stringOrNull"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Union of the XML Schema string type and the GML Nulltype.  An element which uses this type may 
have content which is either a string or a value from Nulltype.  Note that a "string" may contain whitespace.  </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <union memberTypes="gml:NullEnumeration string anyURI"/> 
 </simpleType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <simpleType name="NameOrNull"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Union of the XML Schema Name type and the GML Nulltype.  An element which uses this type may 
have content which is either a Name or a value from Nulltype.  Note that a "Name" may not contain whitespace.  
</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <union memberTypes="gml:NullEnumeration Name anyURI"/> 
 </simpleType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <simpleType name="NameOrNullList"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>XML List based on the union type defined above.  An element declared with this type contains a 
space-separated list of Name values with null values interspersed as needed</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <list itemType="gml:NameOrNull"/> 
 </simpleType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <simpleType name="NameList"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>XML List based on XML Schema Name type.  An element of this type contains a space-separated 
list of Name values</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <list itemType="Name"/> 
 </simpleType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 275 
 


 


 <simpleType name="doubleOrNull"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Union of the XML Schema double type and the GML Nulltype.  An element which uses this type 
may have content which is either a double or a value from Nulltype</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <union memberTypes="gml:NullEnumeration double anyURI"/> 
 </simpleType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <simpleType name="doubleOrNullList"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>XML List based on the union type defined above.  An element declared with this type contains a 
space-separated list of double values with null values interspersed as needed</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <list itemType="gml:doubleOrNull"/> 
 </simpleType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <simpleType name="doubleList"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>XML List based on XML Schema double type.  An element of this type contains a space-separated 
list of double values</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <list itemType="double"/> 
 </simpleType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <simpleType name="integerOrNull"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Union of the XML Schema integer type and the GML Nulltype.  An element which uses this type 
may have content which is either an integer or a value from Nulltype</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <union memberTypes="gml:NullEnumeration integer anyURI"/> 
 </simpleType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <simpleType name="integerOrNullList"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>XML List based on the union type defined above.  An element declared with this type contains a 
space-separated list of integer values with null values interspersed as needed</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <list itemType="gml:integerOrNull"/> 
 </simpleType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <simpleType name="integerList"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>XML List based on XML Schema integer type.  An element of this type contains a space-separated 
list of integer values</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <list itemType="integer"/> 
 </simpleType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="CodeType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Name or code with an (optional) authority.  Text token.   
      If the codeSpace attribute is present, then its value should identify a dictionary, thesaurus  
      or authority for the term, such as the organisation who assigned the value,  
      or the dictionary from which it is taken.   
      A text string with an optional codeSpace attribute. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <simpleContent> 
   <extension base="string"> 
    <attribute name="codeSpace" type="anyURI" use="optional"/> 
   </extension> 
  </simpleContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="CodeListType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>List of values on a uniform nominal scale.  List of text tokens.    
      In a list context a token should not include any spaces, so xsd:Name is used instead of xsd:string.    
      If a codeSpace attribute is present, then its value is a reference to  
      a Reference System for the value, a dictionary or code list.</documentation> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


276  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


  </annotation> 
  <simpleContent> 
   <extension base="gml:NameList"> 
    <attribute name="codeSpace" type="anyURI" use="optional"/> 
   </extension> 
  </simpleContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="CodeOrNullListType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>List of values on a uniform nominal scale.  List of text tokens.    
      In a list context a token should not include any spaces, so xsd:Name is used instead of xsd:string.   
      A member of the list may be a typed null.   
      If a codeSpace attribute is present, then its value is a reference to  
      a Reference System for the value, a dictionary or code list.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <simpleContent> 
   <extension base="gml:NameOrNullList"> 
    <attribute name="codeSpace" type="anyURI" use="optional"/> 
   </extension> 
  </simpleContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="MeasureType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Number with a scale.   
      The value of uom (Units Of Measure) attribute is a reference to a Reference System for the amount, either a ratio or position 
scale. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <simpleContent> 
   <extension base="double"> 
    <attribute name="uom" type="anyURI" use="required"/> 
   </extension> 
  </simpleContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="MeasureListType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>List of numbers with a uniform scale.   
      The value of uom (Units Of Measure) attribute is a reference to  
      a Reference System for the amount, either a ratio or position scale. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <simpleContent> 
   <extension base="gml:doubleList"> 
    <attribute name="uom" type="anyURI" use="required"/> 
   </extension> 
  </simpleContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="MeasureOrNullListType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>List of numbers with a uniform scale.   
      A member of the list may be a typed null.  
      The value of uom (Units Of Measure) attribute is a reference to  
      a Reference System for the amount, either a ratio or position scale. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <simpleContent> 
   <extension base="gml:doubleOrNullList"> 
    <attribute name="uom" type="anyURI" use="required"/> 
   </extension> 
  </simpleContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="CoordinatesType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Tables or arrays of tuples.   
        May be used for text-encoding of values from a table.   
        Actually just a string, but allows the user to indicate which characters are used as separators.   
        The value of the 'cs' attribute is the separator for coordinate values,  
        and the value of the 'ts' attribute gives the tuple separator (a single space by default);  
        the default values may be changed to reflect local usage. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 277 
 


 


        Defaults to CSV within a tuple, space between tuples.   
        However, any string content will be schema-valid.  </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <simpleContent> 
   <extension base="string"> 
    <attribute name="decimal" type="string" default="."/> 
    <attribute name="cs" type="string" default=","/> 
    <attribute name="ts" type="string" default="&#x20;"/> 
   </extension> 
  </simpleContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <simpleType name="NCNameList"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A set of values, representing a list of token with the lexical value space of NCName. The tokens are 
seperated by whitespace.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <list itemType="NCName"/> 
 </simpleType> 
 <!-- ============================================================== --> 
 <simpleType name="QNameList"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A set of values, representing a list of token with the lexical value space of QName. The tokens are 
seperated by whitespace.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <list itemType="QName"/> 
 </simpleType> 
 <!-- ============================================================== --> 
</schema> 


C.2 coordinateOperations.xsd 


<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
<schema targetNamespace="http://www.opengis.net/gml" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" 
xmlns:gml="http://www.opengis.net/gml" elementFormDefault="qualified" version="3.1.0" xml:lang="en"> 
 <annotation> 
  <appinfo source="urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-coordinateOperations"/> 
  <documentation> 
   <name>coordinateOperations.xsd</name> 
   <version>3.1.0</version> 
   <scope>How to encode coordinate operation definitions. </scope> 
   <description>Builds on referenceSystems.xsd to encode the data needed to define coordinate operations, including 
Transformations, Conversions, and other specific subtypes of operations. Primary editor: Arliss Whiteside. Last updated 
2003/10/16. </description> 
   <copyright>Copyright (c) 2002-2003 OpenGIS, All Rights Reserved.</copyright> 
   <conformance>This schema encodes the Coordinate Operation (CC_) package of the extended UML Model for OGC 
Abstract Specification Topic 2: Spatial Referencing by Coordinates. That UML model is adapted from ISO 19111 - Spatial 
referencing by coordinates, as described in Annex C of Topic 2. </conformance> 
  </documentation> 
 </annotation> 
 <!-- ====================================================== 
       includes and imports 
 ====================================================== --> 
 <include schemaLocation="referenceSystems.xsd"/> 
 <include schemaLocation="dataQuality.xsd"/> 
 <!-- ====================================================== 
       elements and types 
 ====================================================== --> 
 <element name="_CoordinateOperation" type="gml:AbstractCoordinateOperationType" abstract="true" 
substitutionGroup="gml:Definition"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="AbstractCoordinateOperationBaseType" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Basic encoding for coordinate operation objects, simplifying and restricting the DefinitionType as 
needed. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:DefinitionType"> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


278  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:metaDataProperty" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:remarks" minOccurs="0"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>Comments on or information about this coordinate operation, including source 
information. </documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
     <element ref="gml:coordinateOperationName"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute ref="gml:id" use="required"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="coordinateOperationName" type="gml:SimpleNameType" substitutionGroup="gml:name"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>The name by which this coordinate operation is identified. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="AbstractCoordinateOperationType" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A mathematical operation on coordinates that transforms or converts coordinates to another 
coordinate reference system. Many but not all coordinate operations (from CRS A to CRS B) also uniquely define the inverse 
operation (from CRS B to CRS A). In some cases, the operation method algorithm for the inverse operation is the same as for the 
forward algorithm, but the signs of some operation parameter values must be reversed. In other cases, different algorithms are 
required for the forward and inverse operations, but the same operation parameter values are used. If (some) entirely different 
parameter values are needed, a different coordinate operation shall be defined.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCoordinateOperationBaseType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:coordinateOperationID" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>Set of alternative identifications of this coordinate operation. The first 
coordinateOperationID, if any, is normally the primary identification code, and any others are aliases. </documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
     <element ref="gml:operationVersion" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:validArea" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:scope" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:_positionalAccuracy" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>Unordered set of estimates of the impact of this coordinate operation on point 
position accuracy. Gives position error estimates for target coordinates of this coordinate operation, assuming no errors in source 
coordinates. </documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
     <element ref="gml:sourceCRS" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:targetCRS" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="coordinateOperationID" type="gml:IdentifierType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>An identification of a coordinate operation. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="operationVersion" type="string"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Version of the coordinate transformation (i.e., instantiation due to the stochastic nature of the 
parameters). Mandatory when describing a transformation, and should not be supplied for a conversion. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="sourceCRS" type="gml:CRSRefType"> 
  <annotation> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 279 
 


 


   <documentation>Association to the source CRS (coordinate reference system) of this coordinate operation. 
</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="targetCRS" type="gml:CRSRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to the target CRS (coordinate reference system) of this coordinate operation. For 
constraints on multiplicity of "sourceCRS" and "targetCRS", see UML model of Coordinate Operation package in OGC Abstract 
Specification topic 2. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="coordinateOperationRef" type="gml:CoordinateOperationRefType" 
substitutionGroup="gml:dictionaryEntry"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="CoordinateOperationRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to a coordinate operation, either referencing or containing the definition of that 
coordinate operation. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:DictionaryEntryType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:_CoordinateOperation" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="ConcatenatedOperation" type="gml:ConcatenatedOperationType" 
substitutionGroup="gml:_CoordinateOperation"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="ConcatenatedOperationType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>An ordered sequence of two or more single coordinate operations. The sequence of operations is 
constrained by the requirement that the source coordinate reference system of step (n+1) must be the same as the target 
coordinate reference system of step (n). The source coordinate reference system of the first step and the target coordinate 
reference system of the last step are the source and target coordinate reference system associated with the concatenated 
operation. Instead of a forward operation, an inverse operation may be used for one or more of the operation steps mentioned 
above, if the inverse operation is uniquely defined by the forward operation.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCoordinateOperationType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:usesSingleOperation" minOccurs="2" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>Ordered sequence of associations to the two or more single operations used by this 
concatenated operation. </documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="usesSingleOperation" type="gml:SingleOperationRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to a single operation. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="concatenatedOperationRef" type="gml:ConcatenatedOperationRefType" 
substitutionGroup="gml:coordinateOperationRef"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="ConcatenatedOperationRefType"> 
  <annotation> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


280  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


   <documentation>Association to a concatenated operation, either referencing or containing the definition of that 
concatenated operation. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:CoordinateOperationRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:ConcatenatedOperation" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="_SingleOperation" type="gml:AbstractSingleOperationType" abstract="true" 
substitutionGroup="gml:_CoordinateOperation"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="AbstractSingleOperationType" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A single (not concatenated) coordinate operation. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCoordinateOperationType"/> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="singleOperationRef" type="gml:SingleOperationRefType" 
substitutionGroup="gml:coordinateOperationRef"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="SingleOperationRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to a single operation, either referencing or containing the definition of that single 
operation. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:CoordinateOperationRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:_SingleOperation" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="PassThroughOperation" type="gml:PassThroughOperationType" 
substitutionGroup="gml:_SingleOperation"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="PassThroughOperationType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A pass-through operation specifies that a subset of a coordinate tuple is subject to a specific 
coordinate operation. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractSingleOperationType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:modifiedCoordinate" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>Ordered sequence of positive integers defining the positions in a coordinate tuple of 
the coordinates affected by this pass-through operation. </documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
     <element ref="gml:usesOperation"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="modifiedCoordinate" type="positiveInteger"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A positive integer defining a position in a coordinate tuple. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 281 
 


 


 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="usesOperation" type="gml:OperationRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to the operation applied to the specified ordinates. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="passThroughOperationRef" type="gml:PassThroughOperationRefType" 
substitutionGroup="gml:singleOperationRef"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="PassThroughOperationRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to a pass through operation, either referencing or containing the definition of that pass 
through operation. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:SingleOperationRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:PassThroughOperation" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="_Operation" type="gml:AbstractOperationType" abstract="true" substitutionGroup="gml:_SingleOperation"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="AbstractOperationType" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A parameterized mathematical operation on coordinates that transforms or converts coordinates to 
another coordinate reference system. This coordinate operation uses an operation method, usually with associated parameter 
values. However, operation methods and parameter values are directly associated with concrete subtypes, not with this abstract 
type. 
 
This abstract complexType shall not be directly used, extended, or restricted in a compliant Application Schema. 
</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractSingleOperationType"/> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="operationRef" type="gml:OperationRefType" substitutionGroup="gml:singleOperationRef"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="OperationRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to an abstract operation, either referencing or containing the definition of that operation. 
</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:SingleOperationRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:_Operation" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="_GeneralConversion" type="gml:AbstractGeneralConversionType" abstract="true" 
substitutionGroup="gml:_Operation"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="AbstractGeneralConversionType" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>An abstract operation on coordinates that does not include any change of datum. The best-known 
example of a coordinate conversion is a map projection. The parameters describing coordinate conversions are defined rather 
than empirically derived. Note that some conversions have no parameters. 
 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


282  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


This abstract complexType is expected to be extended for well-known operation methods with many Conversion instances, in 
Application Schemas that define operation-method-specialized element names and contents. This conversion uses an operation 
method, usually with associated parameter values. However, operation methods and parameter values are directly associated 
with concrete subtypes, not with this abstract type. All concrete types derived from this type shall extend this type to include a 
"usesMethod" element that references the "OperationMethod" element. Similarly, all concrete types derived from this type shall 
extend this type to include zero or more elements each named "uses...Value" that each use the type of an element substitutable 
for the "_generalParameterValue" element. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:AbstractOperationType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:metaDataProperty" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:remarks" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:coordinateOperationName"/> 
     <element ref="gml:coordinateOperationID" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:validArea" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:scope" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:_positionalAccuracy" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute ref="gml:id" use="required"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="generalConversionRef" type="gml:GeneralConversionRefType" substitutionGroup="gml:operationRef"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="GeneralConversionRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to a general conversion, either referencing or containing the definition of that 
conversion. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:OperationRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:_GeneralConversion" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="Conversion" type="gml:ConversionType" substitutionGroup="gml:_GeneralConversion"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="ConversionType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A concrete operation on coordinates that does not include any change of Datum. The best-known 
example of a coordinate conversion is a map projection. The parameters describing coordinate conversions are defined rather 
than empirically derived. Note that some conversions have no parameters. 
 
This concrete complexType can be used with all operation methods, without using an Application Schema that defines operation-
method-specialized element names and contents, especially for methods with only one Conversion instance. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGeneralConversionType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:usesMethod"/> 
     <element ref="gml:usesValue" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>Unordered list of composition associations to the set of parameter values used by 
this conversion operation. </documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="usesMethod" type="gml:OperationMethodRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to the operation method used by this coordinate operation. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 283 
 


 


 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="usesValue" type="gml:ParameterValueType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Composition association to a parameter value used by this coordinate operation. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="conversionRef" type="gml:ConversionRefType" substitutionGroup="gml:generalConversionRef"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="ConversionRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to a concrete general-purpose conversion, either referencing or containing the definition 
of that conversion. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:GeneralConversionRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:Conversion" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="_GeneralTransformation" type="gml:AbstractGeneralTransformationType" abstract="true" 
substitutionGroup="gml:_Operation"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="AbstractGeneralTransformationType" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>An abstract operation on coordinates that usually includes a change of Datum. The parameters of a 
coordinate transformation are empirically derived from data containing the coordinates of a series of points in both coordinate 
reference systems. This computational process is usually "over-determined", allowing derivation of error (or accuracy) estimates 
for the transformation. Also, the stochastic nature of the parameters may result in multiple (different) versions of the same 
coordinate transformation. 
 
This abstract complexType is expected to be extended for well-known operation methods with many Transformation instances, in 
Application Schemas that define operation-method-specialized value element names and contents. This transformation uses an 
operation method with associated parameter values. However, operation methods and parameter values are directly associated 
with concrete subtypes, not with this abstract type. All concrete types derived from this type shall extend this type to include a 
"usesMethod" element that references one "OperationMethod" element. Similarly, all concrete types derived from this type shall 
extend this type to include one or more elements each named "uses...Value" that each use the type of an element substitutable 
for the "_generalParameterValue" element. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:AbstractOperationType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:metaDataProperty" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:remarks" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:coordinateOperationName"/> 
     <element ref="gml:coordinateOperationID" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:operationVersion"/> 
     <element ref="gml:validArea" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:scope" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:_positionalAccuracy" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:sourceCRS"/> 
     <element ref="gml:targetCRS"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute ref="gml:id" use="required"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="generalTransformationRef" type="gml:GeneralTransformationRefType" 
substitutionGroup="gml:operationRef"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="GeneralTransformationRefType"> 
  <annotation> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


284  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


   <documentation>Association to a general transformation, either referencing or containing the definition of that 
transformation. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:OperationRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:_GeneralTransformation" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="Transformation" type="gml:TransformationType" substitutionGroup="gml:_GeneralTransformation"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="TransformationType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A concrete operation on coordinates that usually includes a change of datum. The parameters of a 
coordinate transformation are empirically derived from data containing the coordinates of a series of points in both coordinate 
reference systems. This computational process is usually "over-determined", allowing derivation of error (or accuracy) estimates 
for the transformation. Also, the stochastic nature of the parameters may result in multiple (different) versions of the same 
coordinate transformation. 
 
This concrete complexType can be used for all operation methods, without using an Application Schema that defines operation-
method-specialized element names and contents, especially for methods with only one Transformation instance. 
</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGeneralTransformationType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:usesMethod"/> 
     <element ref="gml:usesValue" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>Unordered set of composition associations to the set of parameter values used by 
this transformation operation. </documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="transformationRef" type="gml:TransformationRefType" 
substitutionGroup="gml:generalTransformationRef"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="TransformationRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to a transformation, either referencing or containing the definition of that transformation. 
</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:GeneralTransformationRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:Transformation" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="_generalParameterValue" type="gml:AbstractGeneralParameterValueType" abstract="true"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="AbstractGeneralParameterValueType" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Abstract parameter value or group of parameter values. 
    
This abstract complexType is expected to be extended and restricted for well-known operation methods with many instances, in 
Application Schemas that define operation-method-specialized element names and contents. Specific parameter value elements 
are directly contained in concrete subtypes, not in this abstract type. All concrete types derived from this type shall extend this 
type to include one "...Value" element with an appropriate type, which should be one of the element types allowed in the 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 285 
 


 


ParameterValueType. In addition, all derived concrete types shall extend this type to include a "valueOfParameter" element that 
references one element substitutable for the "OperationParameter" element. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence/> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="parameterValue" type="gml:ParameterValueType" substitutionGroup="gml:_generalParameterValue"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="ParameterValueType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A parameter value, ordered sequence of values, or reference to a file of parameter values. This 
concrete complexType can be used for operation methods without using an Application Schema that defines operation-method-
specialized element names and contents, especially for methods with only one instance. This complexType can be used, 
extended, or restricted for well-known operation methods, especially for methods with many instances. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGeneralParameterValueType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <choice> 
      <element ref="gml:value"/> 
      <element ref="gml:dmsAngleValue"/> 
      <element ref="gml:stringValue"/> 
      <element ref="gml:integerValue"/> 
      <element ref="gml:booleanValue"/> 
      <element ref="gml:valueList"/> 
      <element ref="gml:integerValueList"/> 
      <element ref="gml:valueFile"/> 
     </choice> 
     <element ref="gml:valueOfParameter"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="value" type="gml:MeasureType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Numeric value of an operation parameter, with its associated unit of measure. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="dmsAngleValue" type="gml:DMSAngleType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Value of an angle operation parameter, in either degree-minute-second format or single value 
format. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="stringValue" type="string"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>String value of an operation parameter. A string value does not have an associated unit of measure. 
</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="integerValue" type="positiveInteger"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Positive integer value of an operation parameter, usually used for a count. An integer value does not 
have an associated unit of measure. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="booleanValue" type="boolean"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Boolean value of an operation parameter. A Boolean value does not have an associated unit of 
measure. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="valueList" type="gml:MeasureListType"> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


286  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Ordered sequence of two or more numeric values of an operation parameter list, where each value 
has the same associated unit of measure. An element of this type contains a space-separated sequence of double values. 
</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="integerValueList" type="gml:integerList"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Ordered sequence of two or more integer values of an operation parameter list, usually used for 
counts. These integer values do not have an associated unit of measure. An element of this type contains a space-separated 
sequence of integer values. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="valueFile" type="anyURI"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Reference to a file or a part of a file containing one or more parameter values, each numeric value 
with its associated unit of measure. When referencing a part of a file, that file must contain multiple identified parts, such as an 
XML encoded document. Furthermore, the referenced file or part of a file can reference another part of the same or different files, 
as allowed in XML documents. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="valueOfParameter" type="gml:OperationParameterRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to the operation parameter that this is a value of. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="parameterValueGroup" type="gml:ParameterValueGroupType" 
substitutionGroup="gml:_generalParameterValue"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="ParameterValueGroupType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A group of related parameter values. The same group can be repeated more than once in a 
Conversion, Transformation, or higher level parameterValueGroup, if those instances contain different values of one or more 
parameterValues which suitably distinquish among those groups. This concrete complexType can be used for operation methods 
without using an Application Schema that defines operation-method-specialized element names and contents, especially for 
methods with only one instance. This complexType can be used, extended, or restricted for well-known operation methods, 
especially for methods with many instances. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGeneralParameterValueType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:includesValue" minOccurs="2" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>Unordered set of composition associations to the parameter values and groups of 
values included in this group. </documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
     <element ref="gml:valuesOfGroup"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="includesValue" type="gml:AbstractGeneralParameterValueType" 
substitutionGroup="gml:_generalParameterValue"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A composition association to a parameter value or group of values included in this group. 
</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="valuesOfGroup" type="gml:OperationParameterGroupRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to the operation parameter group for which this element provides parameter values. 
</documentation> 
  </annotation> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 287 
 


 


 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="OperationMethod" type="gml:OperationMethodType" substitutionGroup="gml:Definition"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="OperationMethodBaseType" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Basic encoding for operation method objects, simplifying and restricting the DefinitionType as 
needed. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:DefinitionType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:metaDataProperty" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:remarks" minOccurs="0"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>Comments on or information about this operation method, including source 
information.</documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
     <element ref="gml:methodName"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute ref="gml:id" use="required"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="methodName" type="gml:SimpleNameType" substitutionGroup="gml:name"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>The name by which this operation method is identified. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="OperationMethodType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Definition of an algorithm used to perform a coordinate operation. Most operation methods use a 
number of operation parameters, although some coordinate conversions use none. Each coordinate operation using the method 
assigns values to these parameters. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:OperationMethodBaseType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:methodID" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>Set of alternative identifications of this operation method. The first methodID, if any, 
is normally the primary identification code, and any others are aliases. </documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
     <element ref="gml:methodFormula"/> 
     <element ref="gml:sourceDimensions"/> 
     <element ref="gml:targetDimensions"/> 
     <element ref="gml:usesParameter" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>Unordered list of associations to the set of operation parameters and parameter 
groups used by this operation method. </documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="methodID" type="gml:IdentifierType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>An identification of an operation method. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="methodFormula" type="gml:CodeType"> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


288  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Formula(s) used by this operation method. The value may be a reference to a publication. Note that 
the operation method may not be analytic, in which case this element references or contains the procedure, not an analytic 
formula.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="sourceDimensions" type="positiveInteger"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Number of dimensions in the source CRS of this operation method. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="targetDimensions" type="positiveInteger"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Number of dimensions in the target CRS of this operation method. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="usesParameter" type="gml:AbstractGeneralOperationParameterRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to an operation parameter or parameter group used by this operation method. 
</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="operationMethodRef" type="gml:OperationMethodRefType" substitutionGroup="gml:dictionaryEntry"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="OperationMethodRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to a concrete general-purpose operation method, either referencing or containing the 
definition of that method. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:DictionaryEntryType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:OperationMethod" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="_GeneralOperationParameter" type="gml:AbstractGeneralOperationParameterType" abstract="true" 
substitutionGroup="gml:Definition"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="AbstractGeneralOperationParameterType" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Abstract definition of a parameter or group of parameters used by an operation method. 
</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:DefinitionType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:minimumOccurs" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="minimumOccurs" type="nonNegativeInteger"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>The minimum number of times that values for this parameter group or parameter are required. If this 
attribute is omitted, the minimum number is one. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="abstractGeneralOperationParameterRef" type="gml:AbstractGeneralOperationParameterRefType" 
substitutionGroup="gml:dictionaryEntry"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 289 
 


 


 <complexType name="AbstractGeneralOperationParameterRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to an operation parameter or group, either referencing or containing the definition of that 
parameter or group. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:DictionaryEntryType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:_GeneralOperationParameter" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="OperationParameter" type="gml:OperationParameterType" 
substitutionGroup="gml:_GeneralOperationParameter"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="OperationParameterBaseType" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Basic encoding for operation parameter objects, simplifying and restricting the DefinitionType as 
needed. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:AbstractGeneralOperationParameterType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:metaDataProperty" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:remarks" minOccurs="0"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>Comments on or information about this operation parameter, including source 
information. </documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
     <element ref="gml:parameterName"/> 
     <element ref="gml:minimumOccurs" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute ref="gml:id" use="required"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="parameterName" type="gml:SimpleNameType" substitutionGroup="gml:name"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>The name by which this operation parameter is identified. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="OperationParameterType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>The definition of a parameter used by an operation method. Most parameter values are numeric, but 
other types of parameter values are possible. This complexType is expected to be used or extended for all operation methods, 
without defining operation-method-specialized element names.  </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:OperationParameterBaseType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:parameterID" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>Set of alternative identifications of this operation parameter. The first parameterID, if 
any, is normally the primary identification code, and any others are aliases. </documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="parameterID" type="gml:IdentifierType"> 
  <annotation> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


290  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


   <documentation>An identification of an operation parameter. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="operationParameterRef" type="gml:OperationParameterRefType"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="OperationParameterRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to an operation parameter, either referencing or containing the definition of that 
parameter. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:AbstractGeneralOperationParameterRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:OperationParameter" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="OperationParameterGroup" type="gml:OperationParameterGroupType" 
substitutionGroup="gml:_GeneralOperationParameter"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="OperationParameterGroupBaseType" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Basic encoding for operation parameter group objects, simplifying and restricting the DefinitionType 
as needed. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:AbstractGeneralOperationParameterType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:metaDataProperty" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:remarks" minOccurs="0"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>Comments on or information about this operation parameter group, including source 
information. </documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
     <element ref="gml:groupName"/> 
     <element ref="gml:minimumOccurs" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute ref="gml:id" use="required"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="groupName" type="gml:SimpleNameType" substitutionGroup="gml:name"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>The name by which this operation parameter group is identified. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="OperationParameterGroupType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>The definition of a group of parameters used by an operation method. This complexType is 
expected to be used or extended for all applicable operation methods, without defining operation-method-specialized element 
names.  </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:OperationParameterGroupBaseType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:groupID" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>Set of alternative identifications of this operation parameter group. The first groupID, 
if any, is normally the primary identification code, and any others are aliases. </documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
     <element ref="gml:maximumOccurs" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:includesParameter" minOccurs="2" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
      <annotation> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 291 
 


 


       <documentation>Unordered list of associations to the set of operation parameters that are members 
of this group. </documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="groupID" type="gml:IdentifierType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>An identification of an operation parameter group. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="maximumOccurs" type="positiveInteger"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>The maximum number of times that values for this parameter group can be included. If this attribute 
is omitted, the maximum number is one. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="includesParameter" type="gml:AbstractGeneralOperationParameterRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to an operation parameter that is a member of a group. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="operationParameterGroupRef" type="gml:OperationParameterRefType"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="OperationParameterGroupRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to an operation parameter, either referencing or containing the definition of that 
parameter. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:AbstractGeneralOperationParameterRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:OperationParameterGroup" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
</schema> 


C.3 coordinateReferenceSystems.xsd 


<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
<schema targetNamespace="http://www.opengis.net/gml" xmlns:gml="http://www.opengis.net/gml" 
xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" elementFormDefault="qualified" version="3.1.0" xml:lang="en"> 
 <annotation> 
  <appinfo source="urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-coordinateReferenceSystems"/> 
  <documentation> 
   <name>coordinateReferenceSystems.xsd</name> 
   <version>3.1.0</version> 
   <scope>How to encode coordinate reference system definitions. </scope> 
   <description>Builds on referenceSystems.xsd to encode the data needed to define coordinate reference systems, 
including the specific subtypes of coordinate reference systems. Primary editor: Arliss Whiteside. Last updated 2003/10/16. 
</description> 
   <copyright>Copyright (c) 2002-2003 Open GIS Consortium, All Rights Reserved.</copyright> 
   <conformance>This schema encodes the Coordinate Reference System (SC_) package of the extended UML Model 
for OGC Abstract Specification Topic 2: Spatial Referencing by Coordinates, with the exception of the abstract "SC_CRS" class. 
The "SC_CRS" class is encoded in referenceSystems.xsd, to eliminate the (circular) references from coordinateOperations.xsd to 
coordinateReferenceSystems.xsd. That UML model is adapted from ISO 19111 - Spatial referencing by coordinates, as 
described in Annex C of Topic 2. </conformance> 
  </documentation> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


292  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 </annotation> 
 <!-- ====================================================== 
       includes and imports 
 ====================================================== --> 
 <include schemaLocation="coordinateSystems.xsd"/> 
 <include schemaLocation="datums.xsd"/> 
 <include schemaLocation="coordinateOperations.xsd"/> 
 <!-- ====================================================== 
       elements and types 
 ====================================================== --> 
 <element name="_CoordinateReferenceSystem" type="gml:AbstractCoordinateReferenceSystemType" abstract="true" 
substitutionGroup="gml:_CRS"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="AbstractCoordinateReferenceSystemType" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A coordinate reference system consists of an ordered sequence of coordinate system axes that are 
related to the earth through a datum. A coordinate reference system is defined by one datum and by one coordinate system. Most 
coordinate reference system do not move relative to the earth, except for engineering coordinate reference systems defined on 
moving platforms such as cars, ships, aircraft, and spacecraft. For further information, see OGC Abstract Specification Topic 2. 
 
Coordinate reference systems are commonly divided into sub-types. The common classification criterion for sub-typing of 
coordinate reference systems is the way in which they deal with earth curvature. This has a direct effect on the portion of the 
earth's surface that can be covered by that type of CRS with an acceptable degree of error. The exception to the rule is the 
subtype "Temporal" which has been added by analogy. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCRSType"/> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="coordinateReferenceSystemRef" type="gml:CoordinateReferenceSystemRefType" 
substitutionGroup="gml:crsRef"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="CoordinateReferenceSystemRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to a coordinate reference system, either referencing or containing the definition of that 
reference system. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:CRSRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:_CoordinateReferenceSystem" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="CompoundCRS" type="gml:CompoundCRSType" substitutionGroup="gml:_CRS"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="CompoundCRSType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A coordinate reference system describing the position of points through two or more independent 
coordinate reference systems. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCRSType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:includesCRS" minOccurs="2" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>Ordered sequence of associations to all the component coordinate reference 
systems included in this compound coordinate reference system. </documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="includesCRS" type="gml:CoordinateReferenceSystemRefType"> 
  <annotation> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 293 
 


 


   <documentation>An association to a component coordinate reference system included in this compound coordinate 
reference system. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="compoundCRSRef" type="gml:CompoundCRSRefType" substitutionGroup="gml:crsRef"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="CompoundCRSRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to a compound coordinate reference system, either referencing or containing the 
definition of that reference system. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:CRSRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:CompoundCRS" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="GeographicCRS" type="gml:GeographicCRSType" 
substitutionGroup="gml:_CoordinateReferenceSystem"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="GeographicCRSType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A coordinate reference system based on an ellipsoidal approximation of the geoid; this provides an 
accurate representation of the geometry of geographic features for a large portion of the earth's surface.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCoordinateReferenceSystemType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:usesEllipsoidalCS"/> 
     <element ref="gml:usesGeodeticDatum"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="usesEllipsoidalCS" type="gml:EllipsoidalCSRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to the ellipsoidal coordinate system used by this CRS. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="usesGeodeticDatum" type="gml:GeodeticDatumRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to the geodetic datum used by this CRS. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="geographicCRSRef" type="gml:GeographicCRSRefType" 
substitutionGroup="gml:coordinateReferenceSystemRef"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="GeographicCRSRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to a geographic coordinate reference system, either referencing or containing the 
definition of that reference system. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:CoordinateReferenceSystemRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:GeographicCRS" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


294  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="VerticalCRS" type="gml:VerticalCRSType" substitutionGroup="gml:_CoordinateReferenceSystem"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="VerticalCRSType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A 1D coordinate reference system used for recording heights or depths. Vertical CRSs make use of 
the direction of gravity to define the concept of height or depth, but the relationship with gravity may not be straightforward. By 
implication, ellipsoidal heights (h) cannot be captured in a vertical coordinate reference system. Ellipsoidal heights cannot exist 
independently, but only as an inseparable part of a 3D coordinate tuple defined in a geographic 3D coordinate reference system. 
</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCoordinateReferenceSystemType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:usesVerticalCS"/> 
     <element ref="gml:usesVerticalDatum"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="usesVerticalCS" type="gml:VerticalCSRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to the vertical coordinate system used by this CRS. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="usesVerticalDatum" type="gml:VerticalDatumRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to the vertical datum used by this CRS. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="verticalCRSRef" type="gml:VerticalCRSRefType" 
substitutionGroup="gml:coordinateReferenceSystemRef"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="VerticalCRSRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to a vertical coordinate reference system, either referencing or containing the definition 
of that reference system. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:CoordinateReferenceSystemRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:VerticalCRS" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="GeocentricCRS" type="gml:GeocentricCRSType" substitutionGroup="gml:_CoordinateReferenceSystem"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="GeocentricCRSType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A 3D coordinate reference system with the origin at the approximate centre of mass of the earth. A 
geocentric CRS deals with the earth's curvature by taking a 3D spatial view, which obviates the need to model the earth's 
curvature. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCoordinateReferenceSystemType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <choice> 
      <element ref="gml:usesCartesianCS"/> 
      <element ref="gml:usesSphericalCS"/> 
     </choice> 
     <element ref="gml:usesGeodeticDatum"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 295 
 


 


 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="usesCartesianCS" type="gml:CartesianCSRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to the Cartesian coordinate system used by this CRS. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="usesSphericalCS" type="gml:SphericalCSRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to the spherical coordinate system used by this CRS.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="geocentricCRSRef" type="gml:GeocentricCRSRefType" 
substitutionGroup="gml:coordinateReferenceSystemRef"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="GeocentricCRSRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to a geocentric coordinate reference system, either referencing or containing the 
definition of that reference system. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:CoordinateReferenceSystemRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:GeocentricCRS" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="_GeneralDerivedCRS" type="gml:AbstractGeneralDerivedCRSType" abstract="true" 
substitutionGroup="gml:_CoordinateReferenceSystem"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="AbstractGeneralDerivedCRSType" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A coordinate reference system that is defined by its coordinate conversion from another coordinate 
reference system (not by a datum). This abstract complexType shall not be used, extended, or restricted, in an Application 
Schema, to define a concrete subtype with a meaning equivalent to a concrete subtype specified in this document. 
</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCoordinateReferenceSystemType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:baseCRS"/> 
     <element ref="gml:definedByConversion"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="baseCRS" type="gml:CoordinateReferenceSystemRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to the coordinate reference system used by this derived CRS. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="definedByConversion" type="gml:GeneralConversionRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to the coordinate conversion used to define this derived CRS. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="generalDerivedCRSRef" type="gml:GeneralDerivedCRSRefType" 
substitutionGroup="gml:coordinateReferenceSystemRef"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="GeneralDerivedCRSRefType"> 
  <annotation> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


296  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


   <documentation>Association to a general derived coordinate reference system, either referencing or containing the 
definition of that reference system. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:CoordinateReferenceSystemRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:_GeneralDerivedCRS" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="ProjectedCRS" type="gml:ProjectedCRSType" substitutionGroup="gml:_GeneralDerivedCRS"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="ProjectedCRSType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A 2D coordinate reference system used to approximate the shape of the earth on a planar surface, 
but in such a way that the distortion that is inherent to the approximation is carefully controlled and known. Distortion correction is 
commonly applied to calculated bearings and distances to produce values that are a close match to actual field values. 
</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGeneralDerivedCRSType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:usesCartesianCS"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="projectedCRSRef" type="gml:ProjectedCRSRefType" substitutionGroup="gml:generalDerivedCRSRef"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="ProjectedCRSRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to a projected coordinate reference system, either referencing or containing the 
definition of that reference system. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:GeneralDerivedCRSRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:ProjectedCRS" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="DerivedCRS" type="gml:DerivedCRSType" substitutionGroup="gml:_GeneralDerivedCRS"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="DerivedCRSType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A coordinate reference system that is defined by its coordinate conversion from another coordinate 
reference system but is not a projected coordinate reference system. This category includes coordinate reference systems 
derived from a projected coordinate reference system. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGeneralDerivedCRSType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:derivedCRSType"/> 
     <element ref="gml:usesCS"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="derivedCRSType" type="gml:DerivedCRSTypeType"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="DerivedCRSTypeType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Type of a derived coordinate reference system. </documentation> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 297 
 


 


  </annotation> 
  <simpleContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:CodeType"> 
    <attribute name="codeSpace" type="anyURI" use="required"> 
     <annotation> 
      <documentation>Reference to a source of information specifying the values and meanings of all the 
allowed string values for this DerivedCRSTypeType. </documentation> 
     </annotation> 
    </attribute> 
   </restriction> 
  </simpleContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="usesCS" type="gml:CoordinateSystemRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to the coordinate system used by this CRS. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="derivedCRSRef" type="gml:DerivedCRSRefType" substitutionGroup="gml:generalDerivedCRSRef"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="DerivedCRSRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to a non-projected derived coordinate reference system, either referencing or containing 
the definition of that reference system. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:GeneralDerivedCRSRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:DerivedCRS" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="EngineeringCRS" type="gml:EngineeringCRSType" 
substitutionGroup="gml:_CoordinateReferenceSystem"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="EngineeringCRSType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A contextually local coordinate reference system; which can be divided into two broad categories: 
- earth-fixed systems applied to engineering activities on or near the surface of the earth; 
- CRSs on moving platforms such as road vehicles, vessels, aircraft, or spacecraft. 
For further information, see OGC Abstract Specification Topic 2. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCoordinateReferenceSystemType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:usesCS"/> 
     <element ref="gml:usesEngineeringDatum"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="usesEngineeringDatum" type="gml:EngineeringDatumRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to the engineering datum used by this CRS. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="engineeringCRSRef" type="gml:EngineeringCRSRefType" 
substitutionGroup="gml:coordinateReferenceSystemRef"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="EngineeringCRSRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to an engineering coordinate reference system, either referencing or containing the 
definition of that reference system. </documentation> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


298  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:CoordinateReferenceSystemRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:EngineeringCRS" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="ImageCRS" type="gml:ImageCRSType" substitutionGroup="gml:_CoordinateReferenceSystem"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="ImageCRSType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>An engineering coordinate reference system applied to locations in images. Image coordinate 
reference systems are treated as a separate sub-type because a separate user community exists for images with its own terms of 
reference. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCoordinateReferenceSystemType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <choice> 
      <element ref="gml:usesCartesianCS"/> 
      <element ref="gml:usesObliqueCartesianCS"/> 
     </choice> 
     <element ref="gml:usesImageDatum"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="usesObliqueCartesianCS" type="gml:ObliqueCartesianCSRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to the oblique Cartesian coordinate system used by this CRS.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="usesImageDatum" type="gml:ImageDatumRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to the image datum used by this CRS. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="imageCRSRef" type="gml:ImageCRSRefType" substitutionGroup="gml:coordinateReferenceSystemRef"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="ImageCRSRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to an image coordinate reference system, either referencing or containing the definition 
of that reference system. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:CoordinateReferenceSystemRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:ImageCRS" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="TemporalCRS" type="gml:TemporalCRSType" substitutionGroup="gml:_CoordinateReferenceSystem"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="TemporalCRSType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A 1D coordinate reference system used for the recording of time. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCoordinateReferenceSystemType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:usesTemporalCS"/> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 299 
 


 


     <element ref="gml:usesTemporalDatum"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="usesTemporalCS" type="gml:TemporalCSRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to the temporal coordinate system used by this CRS. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="usesTemporalDatum" type="gml:TemporalDatumRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to the temporal datum used by this CRS. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="temporalCRSRef" type="gml:TemporalCRSRefType" 
substitutionGroup="gml:coordinateReferenceSystemRef"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="TemporalCRSRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to a temporal coordinate reference system, either referencing or containing the 
definition of that reference system. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:CoordinateReferenceSystemRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:TemporalCRS" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
</schema> 


C.4 coordinateSystems.xsd 


<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
<schema targetNamespace="http://www.opengis.net/gml" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" 
xmlns:gml="http://www.opengis.net/gml" elementFormDefault="qualified" version="3.1.0" xml:lang="en"> 
 <annotation> 
  <appinfo source="urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-coordinateSystems"/> 
  <documentation> 
   <name>coordinateSystems.xsd</name> 
   <version>3.1.0</version> 
   <scope>How to encode coordinate system definitions. </scope> 
   <description>Builds on referenceSystems.xsd to encode the data needed to define coordinate systems, including the 
specific subtypes of coordinate systems. Primary editor: Arliss Whiteside. Last updated 2003/10/16. </description> 
   <copyright>Copyright (c) 2002-2003 OpenGIS, All Rights Reserved.</copyright> 
   <conformance>This schema encodes the Coordinate System (CS_) package of the extended UML Model for OGC 
Abstract Specification Topic 2: Spatial Referencing by Coordinates. That UML model is adapted from ISO 19111 - Spatial 
referencing by coordinates, as described in Annex C of Topic 2. </conformance> 
  </documentation> 
 </annotation> 
 <!-- ====================================================== 
       includes and imports 
 ====================================================== --> 
 <include schemaLocation="referenceSystems.xsd"/> 
 <!-- ====================================================== 
       elements and types 
 ====================================================== --> 
 <element name="CoordinateSystemAxis" type="gml:CoordinateSystemAxisType" substitutionGroup="gml:Definition"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="CoordinateSystemAxisBaseType" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


300  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


   <documentation>Basic encoding for coordinate system axis objects, simplifying and restricting the DefinitionType as 
needed. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:DefinitionType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:metaDataProperty" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:remarks" minOccurs="0"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>Comments on or information about this coordinate system axis, including data 
source information. </documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
     <element ref="gml:axisName"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute ref="gml:id" use="required"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="axisName" type="gml:SimpleNameType" substitutionGroup="gml:name"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>The name by which this coordinate system axis is identified. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="CoordinateSystemAxisType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Definition of a coordinate system axis. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:CoordinateSystemAxisBaseType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:axisID" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>Set of alternative identifications of this coordinate system axis. The first axisID, if 
any, is normally the primary identification code, and any others are aliases. </documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
     <element ref="gml:axisAbbrev"/> 
     <element ref="gml:axisDirection"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute ref="gml:uom" use="required"/> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="axisID" type="gml:IdentifierType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>An identification of a coordinate system axis. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="axisAbbrev" type="gml:CodeType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>The abbreviation used for this coordinate system axis. This abbreviation can be used to identify the 
ordinates in a coordinate tuple. Examples are X and Y. The codeSpace attribute can reference a source of more information on a 
set of standardized abbreviations, or on this abbreviation. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="axisDirection" type="gml:CodeType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Direction of this coordinate system axis (or in the case of Cartesian projected coordinates, the 
direction of this coordinate system axis at the origin). Examples: north or south, east or west, up or down. Within any set of 
coordinate system axes, only one of each pair of terms can be used. For earth-fixed CRSs, this direction is often approximate and 
intended to provide a human interpretable meaning to the axis. When a geodetic datum is used, the precise directions of the axes 
may therefore vary slightly from this approximate direction. Note that an EngineeringCRS can include specific descriptions of the 
directions of its coordinate system axes. For example, the path of a linear CRS axis can be referenced in another document, such 
as referencing a GML feature that references or includes a curve geometry. The codeSpace attribute can reference a source of 
more information on a set of standardized directions, or on this direction. </documentation> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 301 
 


 


  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <attribute name="uom" type="anyURI"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Identifier of the unit of measure used for this coordinate system axis. The value of this coordinate in 
a coordinate tuple shall be recorded using this unit of measure, whenever those coordinates use a coordinate reference system 
that uses a coordinate system that uses this axis.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </attribute> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="coordinateSystemAxisRef" type="gml:CoordinateSystemAxisRefType" 
substitutionGroup="gml:dictionaryEntry"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="CoordinateSystemAxisRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to a coordinate system axis, either referencing or containing the definition of that axis. 
</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:DictionaryEntryType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:CoordinateSystemAxis" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="_CoordinateSystem" type="gml:AbstractCoordinateSystemType" abstract="true" 
substitutionGroup="gml:Definition"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="AbstractCoordinateSystemBaseType" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Basic encoding for coordinate system objects, simplifying and restricting the DefinitionType as 
needed. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:DefinitionType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:metaDataProperty" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:remarks" minOccurs="0"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>Comments on or information about this coordinate system, including data source 
information. </documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
     <element ref="gml:csName"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute ref="gml:id" use="required"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="csName" type="gml:SimpleNameType" substitutionGroup="gml:name"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>The name by which this coordinate system is identified. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="AbstractCoordinateSystemType" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A coordinate system (CS) is the set of coordinate system axes that spans a given coordinate space. 
A CS is derived from a set of (mathematical) rules for specifying how coordinates in a given space are to be assigned to points. 
The coordinate values in a coordinate tuple shall be recorded in the order in which the coordinate system axes associations are 
recorded, whenever those coordinates use a coordinate reference system that uses this coordinate system. This abstract 
complexType shall not be used, extended, or restricted, in an Application Schema, to define a concrete subtype with a meaning 
equivalent to a concrete subtype specified in this document. </documentation> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


302  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCoordinateSystemBaseType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:csID" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>Set of alternative identifications of this coordinate system. The first csID, if any, is 
normally the primary identification code, and any others are aliases. </documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
     <element ref="gml:usesAxis" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>Ordered sequence of associations to the coordinate system axes included in this 
coordinate system. </documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="csID" type="gml:IdentifierType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>An identification of a coordinate system. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="usesAxis" type="gml:CoordinateSystemAxisRefType" substitutionGroup="gml:dictionaryEntry"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to a coordinate system axis. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="coordinateSystemRef" type="gml:CoordinateSystemRefType"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="CoordinateSystemRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to a coordinate system, either referencing or containing the definition of that coordinate 
system. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:DictionaryEntryType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:_CoordinateSystem" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="EllipsoidalCS" type="gml:EllipsoidalCSType" substitutionGroup="gml:_CoordinateSystem"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="EllipsoidalCSType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A two- or three-dimensional coordinate system in which position is specified by geodetic latitude, 
geodetic longitude, and (in the three-dimensional case) ellipsoidal height. An EllipsoidalCS shall have two or three usesAxis 
associations. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCoordinateSystemType"/> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="ellipsoidalCSRef" type="gml:EllipsoidalCSRefType" substitutionGroup="gml:coordinateSystemRef"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="EllipsoidalCSRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to an ellipsoidal coordinate system, either referencing or containing the definition of that 
coordinate system. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 303 
 


 


   <restriction base="gml:CoordinateSystemRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:EllipsoidalCS" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="CartesianCS" type="gml:CartesianCSType" substitutionGroup="gml:_CoordinateSystem"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="CartesianCSType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A 1-, 2-, or 3-dimensional coordinate system. Gives the position of points relative to orthogonal 
straight axes in the 2- and 3-dimensional cases. In the 1-dimensional case, it contains a single straight coordinate axis. In the 
multi-dimensional case, all axes shall have the same length unit of measure. A CartesianCS shall have one, two, or three 
usesAxis associations. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCoordinateSystemType"/> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="cartesianCSRef" type="gml:CartesianCSRefType" substitutionGroup="gml:coordinateSystemRef"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="CartesianCSRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to a Cartesian coordinate system, either referencing or containing the definition of that 
coordinate system. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:CoordinateSystemRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:CartesianCS" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="VerticalCS" type="gml:VerticalCSType" substitutionGroup="gml:_CoordinateSystem"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="VerticalCSType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A one-dimensional coordinate system used to record the heights (or depths) of points. Such a 
coordinate system is usually dependent on the Earth's gravity field, perhaps loosely as when atmospheric pressure is the basis 
for the vertical coordinate system axis. A VerticalCS shall have one usesAxis association. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCoordinateSystemType"/> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="verticalCSRef" type="gml:VerticalCSRefType" substitutionGroup="gml:coordinateSystemRef"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="VerticalCSRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to a vertical coordinate system, either referencing or containing the definition of that 
coordinate system. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:CoordinateSystemRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:VerticalCS" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


304  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="TemporalCS" type="gml:TemporalCSType" substitutionGroup="gml:_CoordinateSystem"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="TemporalCSType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A one-dimensional coordinate system containing a single time axis, used to describe the temporal 
position of a point in the specified time units from a specified time origin. A TemporalCS shall have one usesAxis association. 
</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCoordinateSystemType"/> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="temporalCSRef" type="gml:TemporalCSRefType" substitutionGroup="gml:coordinateSystemRef"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="TemporalCSRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to a temporal coordinate system, either referencing or containing the definition of that 
coordinate system. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:CoordinateSystemRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:TemporalCS" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="LinearCS" type="gml:LinearCSType" substitutionGroup="gml:_CoordinateSystem"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="LinearCSType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A one-dimensional coordinate system that consists of the points that lie on the single axis 
described. The associated ordinate is the distance from the specified origin to the point along the axis. Example: usage of the line 
feature representing a road to describe points on or along that road. A LinearCS shall have one usesAxis association. 
</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCoordinateSystemType"/> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="linearCSRef" type="gml:LinearCSRefType" substitutionGroup="gml:coordinateSystemRef"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="LinearCSRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to a linear coordinate system, either referencing or containing the definition of that 
coordinate system. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:CoordinateSystemRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:LinearCS" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="UserDefinedCS" type="gml:UserDefinedCSType" substitutionGroup="gml:_CoordinateSystem"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="UserDefinedCSType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A two- or three-dimensional coordinate system that consists of any combination of coordinate axes 
not covered by any other coordinate system type. An example is a multilinear coordinate system which contains one coordinate 
axis that may have any 1-D shape which has no intersections with itself. This non-straight axis is supplemented by one or two 
straight axes to complete a 2 or 3 dimensional coordinate system. The non-straight axis is typically incrementally straight or 
curved. A UserDefinedCS shall have two or three usesAxis associations. </documentation> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 305 
 


 


  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCoordinateSystemType"/> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="userDefinedCSRef" type="gml:UserDefinedCSRefType" substitutionGroup="gml:coordinateSystemRef"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="UserDefinedCSRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to a user-defined coordinate system, either referencing or containing the definition of 
that coordinate system. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:CoordinateSystemRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:UserDefinedCS" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="SphericalCS" type="gml:SphericalCSType" substitutionGroup="gml:_CoordinateSystem"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="SphericalCSType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A three-dimensional coordinate system with one distance measured from the origin and two angular 
coordinates. Not to be confused with an ellipsoidal coordinate system based on an ellipsoid "degenerated" into a sphere. A 
SphericalCS shall have three usesAxis associations. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCoordinateSystemType"/> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="sphericalCSRef" type="gml:SphericalCSRefType" substitutionGroup="gml:coordinateSystemRef"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="SphericalCSRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to a spherical coordinate system, either referencing or containing the definition of that 
coordinate system. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:CoordinateSystemRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:SphericalCS" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="PolarCS" type="gml:PolarCSType" substitutionGroup="gml:_CoordinateSystem"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="PolarCSType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A two-dimensional coordinate system in which position is specified by the distance from the origin 
and the angle between the line from the origin to a point and a reference direction. A PolarCS shall have two usesAxis 
associations. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCoordinateSystemType"/> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="polarCSRef" type="gml:PolarCSRefType" substitutionGroup="gml:coordinateSystemRef"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="PolarCSRefType"> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


306  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to a polar coordinate system, either referencing or containing the definition of that 
coordinate system. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:CoordinateSystemRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:PolarCS" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="CylindricalCS" type="gml:CylindricalCSType" substitutionGroup="gml:_CoordinateSystem"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="CylindricalCSType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A three-dimensional coordinate system consisting of a polar coordinate system extended by a 
straight coordinate axis perpendicular to the plane spanned by the polar coordinate system. A CylindricalCS shall have three 
usesAxis associations. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCoordinateSystemType"/> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="cylindricalCSRef" type="gml:CylindricalCSRefType" substitutionGroup="gml:coordinateSystemRef"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="CylindricalCSRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to a cylindrical coordinate system, either referencing or containing the definition of that 
coordinate system. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:CoordinateSystemRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:CylindricalCS" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="ObliqueCartesianCS" type="gml:ObliqueCartesianCSType" substitutionGroup="gml:_CoordinateSystem"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="ObliqueCartesianCSType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A two- or three-dimensional coordinate system with straight axes that are not necessarily 
orthogonal. An ObliqueCartesianCS shall have two or three usesAxis associations. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCoordinateSystemType"/> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="obliqueCartesianCSRef" type="gml:ObliqueCartesianCSRefType" 
substitutionGroup="gml:coordinateSystemRef"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="ObliqueCartesianCSRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to an oblique-Cartesian coordinate system, either referencing or containing the 
definition of that coordinate system. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:CoordinateSystemRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:ObliqueCartesianCS" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 307 
 


 


  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
</schema> 


C.5 coverage.xsd 


<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
<schema targetNamespace="http://www.opengis.net/gml" xmlns:gml="http://www.opengis.net/gml" 
xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink" elementFormDefault="qualified" 
version="3.1.0"> 
 <annotation> 
  <appinfo source="urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-xsd:coverage:v3.1.0">coverage.xsd</appinfo> 
  <documentation xml:lang="en"> GML Coverage schema.  
    Copyright (c) 2004 OGC, All Rights Reserved. 
    </documentation> 
 </annotation> 
 <!-- ============================================================== 
       includes and imports 
 ============================================================== --> 
 <include schemaLocation="feature.xsd"/> 
 <include schemaLocation="valueObjects.xsd"/> 
 <include schemaLocation="grids.xsd"/> 
 <include schemaLocation="geometryAggregates.xsd"/> 
 <!-- ============================================================== 
       global types and elements 
 ============================================================== --> 
 <!-- ================= Abstract coverage definition ================== --> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="_Coverage" type="gml:AbstractCoverageType" abstract="true" substitutionGroup="gml:_Feature"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="AbstractCoverageType" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Abstract element which acts as the head of a substitution group for coverages. Note that a coverage 
is a GML feature.  </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractFeatureType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:domainSet"/> 
     <element ref="gml:rangeSet"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute name="dimension" type="positiveInteger" use="optional"/> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="_ContinuousCoverage" type="gml:AbstractContinuousCoverageType" abstract="true" 
substitutionGroup="gml:_Feature"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="AbstractContinuousCoverageType" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A continuous coverage as defined in ISO 19123 is a coverage that can return different values for the 
same feature attribute at different direct positions within a single spatiotemporal object in its spatiotemporal 
domain</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCoverageType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:coverageFunction" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="_DiscreteCoverage" type="gml:AbstractDiscreteCoverageType" abstract="true" 
substitutionGroup="gml:_Coverage"/> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


308  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="AbstractDiscreteCoverageType" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A discrete coverage consists of a domain set, range set and optionally a coverage function. The 
domain set consists of either geometry or temporal objects, finite in number. The range set is comprised of a finite number of 
attribute values each of which is associated to every direct position within any single spatiotemporal object in the domain. In other 
words, the range values are constant on each spatiotemporal object in the domain. This coverage function maps each element 
from the coverage domain to an element in its range. This definition conforms to ISO 19123.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCoverageType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:coverageFunction" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="domainSet" type="gml:DomainSetType"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="DomainSetType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>The spatiotemporal domain of a coverage.   
  Typically  
  * a geometry collection,  
  * an implicit geometry (e.g. a grid),  
  * an explicit or implicit collection of time instances or periods, or 
 
N.B. Temporal geometric complexes and temporal grids are not yet implemented in GML.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <choice minOccurs="0"> 
   <element ref="gml:_Geometry"/> 
   <element ref="gml:_TimeObject"/> 
  </choice> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="rangeSet" type="gml:RangeSetType"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="RangeSetType"> 
  <choice> 
   <element ref="gml:ValueArray" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
    <annotation> 
     <documentation>each member _Value holds a tuple or "row" from the equivalent table</documentation> 
    </annotation> 
   </element> 
   <element ref="gml:_ScalarValueList" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
    <annotation> 
     <documentation>each list holds the complete set of one scalar component from the values - i.e. a "column" 
from the equivalent table</documentation> 
    </annotation> 
   </element> 
   <element ref="gml:DataBlock"> 
    <annotation> 
     <documentation>Its tuple list holds the values as space-separated tuples each of which contains comma-
separated components, and the tuple structure is specified using the rangeParameters property.   
</documentation> 
    </annotation> 
   </element> 
   <element ref="gml:File"> 
    <annotation> 
     <documentation>a reference to an external source for the data, together with a description of how that 
external source is structured 
</documentation> 
    </annotation> 
   </element> 
  </choice> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="coverageFunction" type="gml:CoverageFunctionType"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 309 
 


 


 <complexType name="CoverageFunctionType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> 
      The function or rule which defines the map from members of the domainSet to the range.   
      More functions will be added to this list 
    </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <choice> 
   <element ref="gml:MappingRule"/> 
   <element ref="gml:GridFunction"/> 
  </choice> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <!-- ============== Components for encoding the rangeSet ============= --> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="DataBlock" type="gml:DataBlockType"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="DataBlockType"> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:rangeParameters"/> 
   <choice> 
    <element ref="gml:tupleList"/> 
    <element ref="gml:doubleOrNullTupleList"/> 
   </choice> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="tupleList" type="gml:CoordinatesType"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="doubleOrNullTupleList" type="gml:doubleOrNullList"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="File" type="gml:FileType"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="FileType"> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:rangeParameters"/> 
   <element name="fileName" type="anyURI"/> 
   <element name="fileStructure" type="gml:FileValueModelType"/> 
   <element name="mimeType" type="anyURI" minOccurs="0"/> 
   <element name="compression" type="anyURI" minOccurs="0"/> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <simpleType name="FileValueModelType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>List of codes that identifies the file structure model for records stored in files.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <restriction base="string"> 
   <enumeration value="Record Interleaved"/> 
  </restriction> 
 </simpleType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="rangeParameters" type="gml:RangeParametersType"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="RangeParametersType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> 
      Metadata about the rangeSet.  Definition of record structure.    
      This is required if the rangeSet is encoded in a DataBlock.   
      We use a gml:_Value with empty values as a map of the composite value structure.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence minOccurs="0"> 
   <element ref="gml:_Value"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <!-- ============= Components for coverageFunctions ================ --> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


310  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 <element name="MappingRule" type="gml:StringOrRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Description of a rule for associating members from the domainSet with members of the rangeSet.  
</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="GridFunction" type="gml:GridFunctionType"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="GridFunctionType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Defines how values in the domain are mapped to the range set. The start point and the sequencing 
rule are specified here.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element name="sequenceRule" type="gml:SequenceRuleType" minOccurs="0"> 
    <annotation> 
     <documentation>If absent, the implied value is "Linear".</documentation> 
    </annotation> 
   </element> 
   <element name="startPoint" type="gml:integerList" minOccurs="0"> 
    <annotation> 
     <documentation>Index position of the first grid post, which must lie somwhere in the GridEnvelope.  If absent, 
the startPoint is equal to the value of gridEnvelope::low from the grid definition.  </documentation> 
    </annotation> 
   </element> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="IndexMap" type="gml:IndexMapType" substitutionGroup="gml:GridFunction"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="IndexMapType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Exends GridFunctionType with a lookUpTable.  This contains a list of indexes of members within the 
rangeSet corresponding with the members of the domainSet.  The domainSet is traversed in list order if it is enumerated 
explicitly, or in the order specified by a SequenceRule if the domain is an implicit set.    The length of the lookUpTable 
corresponds with the length of the subset of the domainSet for which the coverage is defined.  </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:GridFunctionType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element name="lookUpTable" type="gml:integerList"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="SequenceRuleType"> 
  <simpleContent> 
   <extension base="gml:SequenceRuleNames"> 
    <attribute name="order" type="gml:IncrementOrder" use="optional"/> 
   </extension> 
  </simpleContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <simpleType name="SequenceRuleNames"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>List of codes (adopted from ISO 19123 Annex C) that identifies the rule for traversing a grid to 
correspond with the sequence of members of the rangeSet.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <restriction base="string"> 
   <enumeration value="Linear"/> 
   <enumeration value="Boustrophedonic"/> 
   <enumeration value="Cantor-diagonal"/> 
   <enumeration value="Spiral"/> 
   <enumeration value="Morton"/> 
   <enumeration value="Hilbert"/> 
  </restriction> 
 </simpleType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <simpleType name="IncrementOrder"> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 311 
 


 


  <annotation> 
   <documentation>The enumeration value here indicates the incrementation order  to be used on the first 2 axes, i.e. 
"+x-y" means that the points on the first axis are to be traversed from lowest to highest and  the points on the second axis are to 
be traversed from highest to lowest. The points on all other axes (if any) beyond the first 2 are assumed to increment from lowest 
to highest.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <restriction base="string"> 
   <enumeration value="+x+y"/> 
   <enumeration value="+y+x"/> 
   <enumeration value="+x-y"/> 
   <enumeration value="-x-y"/> 
  </restriction> 
 </simpleType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <!-- == Specialised Coverage types - typed by the structure of the domain set == --> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="MultiPointCoverage" type="gml:MultiPointCoverageType" substitutionGroup="gml:_DiscreteCoverage"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="MultiPointCoverageType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A discrete coverage type whose domain is defined by a collection of point 
   </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:AbstractDiscreteCoverageType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <group ref="gml:StandardObjectProperties"/> 
     <element ref="gml:boundedBy" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:multiPointDomain"/> 
     <element ref="gml:rangeSet"/> 
     <element ref="gml:coverageFunction" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="multiPointDomain" type="gml:MultiPointDomainType" substitutionGroup="gml:domainSet"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="MultiPointDomainType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:DomainSetType"> 
    <sequence minOccurs="0"> 
     <element ref="gml:MultiPoint"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="MultiCurveCoverage" type="gml:MultiCurveCoverageType" substitutionGroup="gml:_DiscreteCoverage"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="MultiCurveCoverageType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A discrete coverage type whose domain is defined by a collection of curves.  
   </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:AbstractDiscreteCoverageType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <group ref="gml:StandardObjectProperties"/> 
     <element ref="gml:boundedBy" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:multiCurveDomain"/> 
     <element ref="gml:rangeSet"/> 
     <element ref="gml:coverageFunction" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="multiCurveDomain" type="gml:MultiCurveDomainType" substitutionGroup="gml:domainSet"/> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


312  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="MultiCurveDomainType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:DomainSetType"> 
    <sequence minOccurs="0"> 
     <element ref="gml:MultiCurve"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="MultiSurfaceCoverage" type="gml:MultiSurfaceCoverageType" 
substitutionGroup="gml:_DiscreteCoverage"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="MultiSurfaceCoverageType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A discrete coverage type whose domain is defined by a collection of surface patches (includes 
polygons, triangles, rectangles, etc).  
   </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:AbstractDiscreteCoverageType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <group ref="gml:StandardObjectProperties"/> 
     <element ref="gml:boundedBy" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:multiSurfaceDomain"/> 
     <element ref="gml:rangeSet"/> 
     <element ref="gml:coverageFunction" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="multiSurfaceDomain" type="gml:MultiSurfaceDomainType" substitutionGroup="gml:domainSet"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="MultiSurfaceDomainType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:DomainSetType"> 
    <sequence minOccurs="0"> 
     <element ref="gml:MultiSurface"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="MultiSolidCoverage" type="gml:MultiSolidCoverageType" substitutionGroup="gml:_DiscreteCoverage"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="MultiSolidCoverageType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A discrete coverage type whose domain is defined by a collection of Solids.  
   </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:AbstractDiscreteCoverageType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <group ref="gml:StandardObjectProperties"/> 
     <element ref="gml:boundedBy" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:multiSolidDomain"/> 
     <element ref="gml:rangeSet"/> 
     <element ref="gml:coverageFunction" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="multiSolidDomain" type="gml:MultiSolidDomainType" substitutionGroup="gml:domainSet"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="MultiSolidDomainType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:DomainSetType"> 
    <sequence minOccurs="0"> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 313 
 


 


     <element ref="gml:MultiSolid"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="GridCoverage" type="gml:GridCoverageType" substitutionGroup="gml:_DiscreteCoverage"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="GridCoverageType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:AbstractDiscreteCoverageType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <group ref="gml:StandardObjectProperties"/> 
     <element ref="gml:boundedBy" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:gridDomain"/> 
     <element ref="gml:rangeSet"/> 
     <element ref="gml:coverageFunction" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="gridDomain" type="gml:GridDomainType" substitutionGroup="gml:domainSet"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="GridDomainType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:DomainSetType"> 
    <choice minOccurs="0"> 
     <element ref="gml:Grid"/> 
    </choice> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="RectifiedGridCoverage" type="gml:RectifiedGridCoverageType" 
substitutionGroup="gml:_DiscreteCoverage"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="RectifiedGridCoverageType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:AbstractDiscreteCoverageType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <group ref="gml:StandardObjectProperties"/> 
     <element ref="gml:boundedBy" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:rectifiedGridDomain"/> 
     <element ref="gml:rangeSet"/> 
     <element ref="gml:coverageFunction" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="rectifiedGridDomain" type="gml:RectifiedGridDomainType" substitutionGroup="gml:domainSet"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="RectifiedGridDomainType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:DomainSetType"> 
    <choice minOccurs="0"> 
     <element ref="gml:RectifiedGrid"/> 
    </choice> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
</schema> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


314  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


C.6 dataQuality.xsd 


<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
<!-- edited with XML Spy v4.4 U (http://www.xmlspy.com) by Arliss J Whiteside (BAE Systems) --> 
<schema targetNamespace="http://www.opengis.net/gml" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" 
xmlns:gml="http://www.opengis.net/gml" elementFormDefault="qualified" version="3.1.0" xml:lang="en"> 
 <annotation> 
  <appinfo source="urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-dataQuality"/> 
  <documentation> 
   <name>dataQuality.xsd</name> 
   <version>3.1.0</version> 
   <scope>How to encode positional data quality information. </scope> 
   <description>Builds on units.xsd to encode the data needed to describe the positional accuracy of coordinate 
operations. Primary editor: Arliss Whiteside. Last updated 2003/10/16. </description> 
   <copyright>Copyright (c) 2002-2003 OpenGIS, All Rights Reserved.</copyright> 
   <conformance>This schema encodes the Data Quality (DQ) package of the extended UML Model for OGC Abstract 
Specification Topic 2: Spatial Referencing by Coordinates. That UML model is adapted from ISO 19111 - Spatial referencing by 
coordinates, as described in Annex C of Topic 2. </conformance> 
  </documentation> 
 </annotation> 
 <!-- ====================================================== 
       includes and imports 
 ====================================================== --> 
 <include schemaLocation="units.xsd"/> 
 <!-- ====================================================== 
       elements and types 
 ====================================================== --> 
 <element name="_positionalAccuracy" type="gml:AbstractPositionalAccuracyType" abstract="true"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="AbstractPositionalAccuracyType" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Position error estimate (or accuracy) data. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:measureDescription" minOccurs="0"/> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="measureDescription" type="gml:CodeType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A description of the position accuracy parameter(s) provided. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="absoluteExternalPositionalAccuracy" type="gml:AbsoluteExternalPositionalAccuracyType" 
substitutionGroup="gml:_positionalAccuracy"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="AbsoluteExternalPositionalAccuracyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Closeness of reported coordinate values to values accepted as or being true. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractPositionalAccuracyType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:result"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="relativeInternalPositionalAccuracy" type="gml:RelativeInternalPositionalAccuracyType" 
substitutionGroup="gml:_positionalAccuracy"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="RelativeInternalPositionalAccuracyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Closeness of the relative positions of two or more positions to their respective relative positions 
accepted as or being true. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractPositionalAccuracyType"> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 315 
 


 


    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:result"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="result" type="gml:MeasureType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A quantitative result defined by the evaluation procedure used, and identified by the 
measureDescription. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="covarianceMatrix" type="gml:CovarianceMatrixType" substitutionGroup="gml:_positionalAccuracy"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="CovarianceMatrixType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Error estimate covariance matrix. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractPositionalAccuracyType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:unitOfMeasure" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>Ordered sequence of units of measure, corresponding to the row and column index 
numbers of the covariance matrix, starting with row and column 1 and ending with row/column N. Each unit of measure is for the 
ordinate reflected in the relevant row and column of the covariance matrix. </documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
     <element ref="gml:includesElement" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>Unordered set of elements in this covariance matrix. Because the covariance matrix 
is symmetrical, only the elements in the upper or lower diagonal part (including the main diagonal) of the matrix need to be 
specified. Any zero valued covariance elements can be omitted. </documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="includesElement" type="gml:CovarianceElementType"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="CovarianceElementType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>An element of a covariance matrix.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:rowIndex"/> 
   <element ref="gml:columnIndex"/> 
   <element ref="gml:covariance"/> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="rowIndex" type="positiveInteger"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Row number of this covariance element value. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="columnIndex" type="positiveInteger"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Column number of this covariance element value. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="covariance" type="double"> 
  <annotation> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


316  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


   <documentation>Value of covariance matrix element. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
</schema> 


C.7 datums.xsd 


<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
<schema targetNamespace="http://www.opengis.net/gml" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" 
xmlns:gml="http://www.opengis.net/gml" elementFormDefault="qualified" version="3.1.0" xml:lang="en"> 
 <annotation> 
  <appinfo source="urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-datums"/> 
  <documentation> 
   <name>datums.xsd</name> 
   <version>3.1.0</version> 
   <scope>How to encode datum definitions. </scope> 
   <description>Builds on referenceSystems.xsd to encode the data needed to define datums, including the specific 
subtypes of datums. Primary editor: Arliss Whiteside. Last updated 2003/10/16. </description> 
   <copyright>Copyright (c) 2002-2003 Open GIS Consortium, All Rights Reserved.</copyright> 
   <conformance>This schema encodes the Datum (CD_) package of the extended UML Model for OGC Abstract 
Specification Topic 2: Spatial Referencing by Coordinates. That UML model is adapted from ISO 19111 - Spatial referencing by 
coordinates, as described in Annex C of Topic 2. </conformance> 
  </documentation> 
 </annotation> 
 <!-- ====================================================== 
       includes and imports 
 ====================================================== --> 
 <include schemaLocation="referenceSystems.xsd"/> 
 <!-- ====================================================== 
       elements and types 
 ====================================================== --> 
 <element name="_Datum" type="gml:AbstractDatumType" abstract="true" substitutionGroup="gml:Definition"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="AbstractDatumBaseType" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Basic encoding for datum objects, simplifying and restricting the DefinitionType as needed. 
</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:DefinitionType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:metaDataProperty" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:remarks" minOccurs="0"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>Comments on this reference system, including source information. 
</documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
     <element ref="gml:datumName"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute ref="gml:id" use="required"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="datumName" type="gml:SimpleNameType" substitutionGroup="gml:name"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>The name by which this datum is identified. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="AbstractDatumType" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A datum specifies the relationship of a coordinate system to the earth, thus creating a coordinate 
reference system. A datum uses a parameter or set of parameters that determine the location of the origin of the coordinate 
reference system. Each datum subtype can be associated with only specific types of coordinate systems. This abstract 
complexType shall not be used, extended, or restricted, in an Application Schema, to define a concrete subtype with a meaning 
equivalent to a concrete subtype specified in this document. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 317 
 


 


  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractDatumBaseType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:datumID" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>Set of alternative identifications of this datum. The first datumID, if any, is normally 
the primary identification code, and any others are aliases. </documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
     <element ref="gml:anchorPoint" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:realizationEpoch" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:validArea" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:scope" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="datumID" type="gml:IdentifierType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>An identification of a datum. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="anchorPoint" type="gml:CodeType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Description, possibly including coordinates, of the point or points used to anchor the datum to the 
Earth. Also known as the "origin", especially for engineering and image datums. The codeSpace attribute can be used to 
reference a source of more detailed on this point or surface, or on a set of such descriptions.  
- For a geodetic datum, this point is also known as the fundamental point, which is traditionally the point where the relationship 
between geoid and ellipsoid is defined. In some cases, the "fundamental point" may consist of a number of points. In those cases, 
the parameters defining the geoid/ellipsoid relationship have been averaged for these points, and the averages adopted as the 
datum definition. 
- For an engineering datum, the anchor point may be a physical point, or it may be a point with defined coordinates in another 
CRS. When appropriate, the coordinates of this anchor point can be referenced in another document, such as referencing a GML 
feature that references or includes a point position. 
- For an image datum, the anchor point is usually either the centre of the image or the corner of the image. 
- For a temporal datum, this attribute is not defined. Instead of the anchor point, a temporal datum carries a separate time origin 
of type DateTime. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="realizationEpoch" type="date"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>The time after which this datum definition is valid. This time may be precise (e.g. 1997.0 for IRTF97) 
or merely a year (e.g. 1983 for NAD83). In the latter case, the epoch usually refers to the year in which a major recalculation of 
the geodetic control network, underlying the datum, was executed or initiated. An old datum can remain valid after a new datum is 
defined. Alternatively, a datum may be superseded by a later datum, in which case the realization epoch for the new datum 
defines the upper limit for the validity of the superseded datum. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="datumRef" type="gml:DatumRefType" substitutionGroup="gml:dictionaryEntry"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="DatumRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to a datum, either referencing or containing the definition of that datum. 
</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:DictionaryEntryType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:_Datum" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


318  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 <element name="EngineeringDatum" type="gml:EngineeringDatumType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Datum"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="EngineeringDatumType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>An engineering datum defines the origin of an engineering coordinate reference system, and is used 
in a region around that origin. This origin can be fixed with respect to the earth (such as a defined point at a construction site), or 
be a defined point on a moving vehicle (such as on a ship or satellite). </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractDatumType"/> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="engineeringDatumRef" type="gml:EngineeringDatumRefType" substitutionGroup="gml:datumRef"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="EngineeringDatumRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to an engineering datum, either referencing or containing the definition of that datum. 
</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:DatumRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:EngineeringDatum" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="ImageDatum" type="gml:ImageDatumType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Datum"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="ImageDatumType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>An image datum defines the origin of an image coordinate reference system, and is used in a local 
context only. For more information, see OGC Abstract Specification Topic 2. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractDatumType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:pixelInCell"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="pixelInCell" type="gml:PixelInCellType"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="PixelInCellType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Specification of the way an image grid is associated with the image data attributes. 
</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <simpleContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:CodeType"> 
    <attribute name="codeSpace" type="anyURI" use="required"> 
     <annotation> 
      <documentation>Reference to a source of information specifying the values and meanings of all the 
allowed string values for this PixelInCellType. </documentation> 
     </annotation> 
    </attribute> 
   </restriction> 
  </simpleContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="imageDatumRef" type="gml:ImageDatumRefType" substitutionGroup="gml:datumRef"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="ImageDatumRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to an image datum, either referencing or containing the definition of that datum. 
</documentation> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 319 
 


 


  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:DatumRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:ImageDatum" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="VerticalDatum" type="gml:VerticalDatumType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Datum"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="VerticalDatumType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A textual description and/or a set of parameters identifying a particular reference level surface used 
as a zero-height surface, including its position with respect to the Earth for any of the height types recognized by this standard. 
There are several types of Vertical Datums, and each may place constraints on the Coordinate Axis with which it is combined to 
create a Vertical CRS. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractDatumType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:verticalDatumType" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="verticalDatumType" type="gml:VerticalDatumTypeType"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="VerticalDatumTypeType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Type of a vertical datum. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <simpleContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:CodeType"> 
    <attribute name="codeSpace" type="anyURI" use="required"> 
     <annotation> 
      <documentation>Reference to a source of information specifying the values and meanings of all the 
allowed string values for this VerticalDatumTypeType. </documentation> 
     </annotation> 
    </attribute> 
   </restriction> 
  </simpleContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="verticalDatumRef" type="gml:VerticalDatumRefType" substitutionGroup="gml:datumRef"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="VerticalDatumRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to a vertical datum, either referencing or containing the definition of that datum. 
</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:DatumRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:VerticalDatum" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="TemporalDatum" type="gml:TemporalDatumType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Datum"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="TemporalDatumBaseType" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


320  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


   <documentation>Partially defines the origin of a temporal coordinate reference system. This type restricts the 
AbstractDatumType to remove the "anchorPoint" and "realizationEpoch" elements. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:AbstractDatumType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:metaDataProperty" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:datumName"/> 
     <element ref="gml:datumID" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:validArea" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:scope" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute ref="gml:id" use="required"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="TemporalDatumType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Defines the origin of a temporal coordinate reference system. This type extends the 
TemporalDatumRestrictionType to add the "origin" element with the dateTime type. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:TemporalDatumBaseType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:origin"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="origin" type="dateTime"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>The date and time origin of this temporal datum. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="temporalDatumRef" type="gml:TemporalDatumRefType" substitutionGroup="gml:datumRef"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="TemporalDatumRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to a temporal datum, either referencing or containing the definition of that datum. 
</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:DatumRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:TemporalDatum" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="GeodeticDatum" type="gml:GeodeticDatumType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Datum"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="GeodeticDatumType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A geodetic datum defines the precise location and orientation in 3-dimensional space of a defined 
ellipsoid (or sphere) that approximates the shape of the earth, or of a Cartesian coordinate system centered in this ellipsoid (or 
sphere). </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractDatumType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:usesPrimeMeridian"/> 
     <element ref="gml:usesEllipsoid"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 321 
 


 


 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="usesPrimeMeridian" type="gml:PrimeMeridianRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to the prime meridian used by this geodetic datum. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="usesEllipsoid" type="gml:EllipsoidRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to the ellipsoid used by this geodetic datum. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="geodeticDatumRef" type="gml:GeodeticDatumRefType" substitutionGroup="gml:datumRef"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="GeodeticDatumRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to a geodetic datum, either referencing or containing the definition of that datum. 
</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:DatumRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:GeodeticDatum" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="PrimeMeridian" type="gml:PrimeMeridianType" substitutionGroup="gml:Definition"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="PrimeMeridianBaseType" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Basic encoding for prime meridian objects, simplifying and restricting the DefinitionType as needed. 
</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:DefinitionType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:metaDataProperty" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:remarks" minOccurs="0"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>Comments on or information about this prime meridian, including source 
information. </documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
     <element ref="gml:meridianName"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute ref="gml:id" use="required"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="meridianName" type="gml:SimpleNameType" substitutionGroup="gml:name"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>The name by which this prime meridian is identified. The meridianName most common value is 
Greenwich, and that value shall be used when the greenwichLongitude value is zero. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="PrimeMeridianType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A prime meridian defines the origin from which longitude values are determined.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:PrimeMeridianBaseType"> 
    <sequence> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


322  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


     <element ref="gml:meridianID" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>Set of alternative identifications of this prime meridian. The first meridianID, if any, is 
normally the primary identification code, and any others are aliases. </documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
     <element ref="gml:greenwichLongitude"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="meridianID" type="gml:IdentifierType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>An identification of a prime meridian. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="greenwichLongitude" type="gml:AngleChoiceType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Longitude of the prime meridian measured from the Greenwich meridian, positive eastward. The 
greenwichLongitude most common value is zero, and that value shall be used when the meridianName value is Greenwich. 
</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="primeMeridianRef" type="gml:PrimeMeridianRefType" substitutionGroup="gml:dictionaryEntry"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="PrimeMeridianRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to a prime meridian, either referencing or containing the definition of that meridian. 
</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:DictionaryEntryType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:PrimeMeridian" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="Ellipsoid" type="gml:EllipsoidType" substitutionGroup="gml:Definition"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="EllipsoidBaseType" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Basic encoding for ellipsoid objects, simplifying and restricting the DefinitionType as needed. 
</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:DefinitionType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:metaDataProperty" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:remarks" minOccurs="0"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>Comments on or information about this ellipsoid, including source information. 
</documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
     <element ref="gml:ellipsoidName"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute ref="gml:id" use="required"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="ellipsoidName" type="gml:SimpleNameType" substitutionGroup="gml:name"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>The name by which this ellipsoid is identified. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 323 
 


 


 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="EllipsoidType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>An ellipsoid is a geometric figure that can be used to describe the approximate shape of the earth. 
In mathematical terms, it is a surface formed by the rotation of an ellipse about its minor axis.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:EllipsoidBaseType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:ellipsoidID" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>Set of alternative identifications of this ellipsoid. The first ellipsoidID, if any, is 
normally the primary identification code, and any others are aliases. </documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
     <element ref="gml:semiMajorAxis"/> 
     <element ref="gml:secondDefiningParameter"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="ellipsoidID" type="gml:IdentifierType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>An identification of an ellipsoid. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="semiMajorAxis" type="gml:LengthType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Length of the semi-major axis of the ellipsoid. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="ellipsoidRef" type="gml:EllipsoidRefType" substitutionGroup="gml:dictionaryEntry"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="EllipsoidRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to an ellipsoid, either referencing or containing the definition of that ellipsoid. 
</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:DictionaryEntryType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:Ellipsoid" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="secondDefiningParameter" type="gml:SecondDefiningParameterType"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="SecondDefiningParameterType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Definition of the second parameter that defines the shape of an ellipsoid. An ellipsoid requires two 
defining parameters: semi-major axis and inverse flattening or semi-major axis and semi-minor axis. When the reference body is 
a sphere rather than an ellipsoid, only a single defining parameter is required, namely the radius of the sphere; in that case, the 
semi-major axis "degenerates" into the radius of the sphere.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <choice> 
   <element ref="gml:inverseFlattening"/> 
   <element ref="gml:semiMinorAxis"/> 
   <element ref="gml:isSphere"/> 
  </choice> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="inverseFlattening" type="gml:ScaleType"> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


324  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Inverse flattening value of the ellipsoid. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="semiMinorAxis" type="gml:LengthType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Length of the semi-minor axis of the ellipsoid. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="isSphere"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>The ellipsoid is degenerate and is actually a sphere. The sphere is completely defined by the semi-
major axis, which is the radius of the sphere. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <simpleType> 
   <restriction base="string"> 
    <enumeration value="sphere"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </simpleType> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
</schema> 


C.8 defaultStyle.xsd 


<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
<!-- edited with XML Spy v4.4 U (http://www.xmlspy.com) by Milan Trninic (Galdos Systems Inc.) --> 
<schema targetNamespace="http://www.opengis.net/gml" xmlns:smil20="http://www.w3.org/2001/SMIL20/" 
xmlns:gml="http://www.opengis.net/gml" xmlns:xsd="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" 
xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" elementFormDefault="qualified" version="3.1.0"> 
 <annotation> 
  <appinfo source="urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-defaultStyle:v3.1.0">defaultStyle.xsd</appinfo> 
  <documentation> 
   <name>defaultStyle.xsd</name> 
   <version>3.1.0</version> 
   <scope/> 
   <description>Default Style schema for GML 3.1.0</description> 
   <copyright>Copyright (c) 2001-2003 OGC, All Rights Reserved.</copyright> 
   <conformance>reference to ISO Specifications</conformance> 
  </documentation> 
 </annotation> 
 <!-- ============================================================== 
       includes and imports 
 ============================================================== --> 
 <include schemaLocation="measures.xsd"/> 
 <import namespace="http://www.w3.org/2001/SMIL20/" schemaLocation="../smil/smil20.xsd"/> 
 <!-- ============================================================== 
      the Style property 
 ============================================================== --> 
 <element name="defaultStyle" type="gml:DefaultStylePropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Top-level property. Used in application schemas to "attach" the styling information to GML data. The 
link between the data and the style should be established through this property only.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="DefaultStylePropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>[complexType of] Top-level property. Used in application schemas to "attach" the styling information 
to GML data. The link between the data and the style should be established through this property only.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:_Style" minOccurs="0"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attribute name="about" type="anyURI" use="optional"/> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ============================================================== 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 325 
 


 


       the Style 
 ============================================================== --> 
 <element name="_Style" type="gml:AbstractStyleType" abstract="true" substitutionGroup="gml:_GML"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>The value of the top-level property. It is an abstract element. Used as the head element of the 
substitution group for extensibility purposes.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="AbstractStyleType" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>[complexType of] The value of the top-level property. It is an abstract element. Used as the head 
element of the substitution group for extensibility purposes.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGMLType"/> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="Style" type="gml:StyleType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Style"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Predefined concrete value of the top-level property. Encapsulates all other styling 
information.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="StyleType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>[complexType of] Predefined concrete value of the top-level property. Encapsulates all other styling 
information.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractStyleType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:featureStyle" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:graphStyle" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ============================================================== 
      Feature Style Property 
 ============================================================== --> 
 <element name="featureStyle" type="gml:FeatureStylePropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation/> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="FeatureStylePropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation/> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:FeatureStyle" minOccurs="0"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attribute name="about" type="anyURI" use="optional"/> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ============================================================== 
      Feature Style 
 ============================================================== --> 
 <element name="FeatureStyle" type="gml:FeatureStyleType" substitutionGroup="gml:_GML"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>The style descriptor for features.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="FeatureStyleType"> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


326  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


  <annotation> 
   <documentation>[complexType of] The style descriptor for features.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGMLType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element name="featureConstraint" type="string" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:geometryStyle" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:topologyStyle" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:labelStyle" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute name="featureType" type="string" use="optional"/> 
    <attribute name="baseType" type="string" use="optional"/> 
    <attribute name="queryGrammar" type="gml:QueryGrammarEnumeration"/> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <simpleType name="QueryGrammarEnumeration"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Used to specify the grammar of the feature query mechanism.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <restriction base="string"> 
   <enumeration value="xpath"/> 
   <enumeration value="xquery"/> 
   <enumeration value="other"/> 
  </restriction> 
 </simpleType> 
 <!-- ============================================================== 
       Base style descriptor type (for geometry, topology, label, graph) 
 ============================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="BaseStyleDescriptorType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Base complex type for geometry, topology, label and graph styles.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGMLType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element name="spatialResolution" type="gml:ScaleType" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element name="styleVariation" type="gml:StyleVariationType" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="smil20:animate" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="smil20:animateMotion" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="smil20:animateColor" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="smil20:set" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ============================================================== 
       Geometry Style Property 
 ============================================================== --> 
 <element name="geometryStyle" type="gml:GeometryStylePropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation/> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="GeometryStylePropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation/> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:GeometryStyle" minOccurs="0"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attribute name="about" type="anyURI" use="optional"/> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ============================================================== 
       Geometry Style 
 ============================================================== --> 
 <element name="GeometryStyle" type="gml:GeometryStyleType" substitutionGroup="gml:_GML"> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 327 
 


 


  <annotation> 
   <documentation>The style descriptor for geometries of a feature.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="GeometryStyleType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>[complexType of] The style descriptor for geometries of a feature.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:BaseStyleDescriptorType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <choice> 
      <element ref="gml:symbol"/> 
      <element name="style" type="string"> 
       <annotation> 
        <appinfo>deprecated</appinfo> 
        <documentation>Deprecated in GML version 3.1.0. Use symbol with inline content 
instead.</documentation> 
       </annotation> 
      </element> 
     </choice> 
     <element ref="gml:labelStyle" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute name="geometryProperty" type="string"/> 
    <attribute name="geometryType" type="string"/> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ============================================================== 
       Topology Style Property 
 ============================================================== --> 
 <element name="topologyStyle" type="gml:TopologyStylePropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation/> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="TopologyStylePropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation/> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:TopologyStyle" minOccurs="0"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attribute name="about" type="anyURI" use="optional"/> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ============================================================== 
       Topology Style 
 ============================================================== --> 
 <element name="TopologyStyle" type="gml:TopologyStyleType" substitutionGroup="gml:_GML"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>The style descriptor for topologies of a feature. Describes individual topology elements 
styles.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="TopologyStyleType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>[complexType of] The style descriptor for topologies of a feature. Describes individual topology 
elements styles.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:BaseStyleDescriptorType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <choice> 
      <element ref="gml:symbol"/> 
      <element name="style" type="string"> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


328  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


       <annotation> 
        <appinfo>deprecated</appinfo> 
        <documentation>Deprecated in GML version 3.1.0. Use symbol with inline content 
instead.</documentation> 
       </annotation> 
      </element> 
     </choice> 
     <element ref="gml:labelStyle" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute name="topologyProperty" type="string"/> 
    <attribute name="topologyType" type="string"/> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ============================================================== 
       Label Style Property 
 ============================================================== --> 
 <element name="labelStyle" type="gml:LabelStylePropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation/> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="LabelStylePropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation/> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:LabelStyle" minOccurs="0"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attribute name="about" type="anyURI" use="optional"/> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ============================================================== 
       Label Style 
 ============================================================== --> 
 <element name="LabelStyle" type="gml:LabelStyleType" substitutionGroup="gml:_GML"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>The style descriptor for labels of a feature, geometry or topology.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="LabelStyleType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>[complexType of] The style descriptor for labels of a feature, geometry or 
topology.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:BaseStyleDescriptorType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element name="style" type="string"/> 
     <element name="label" type="gml:LabelType"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ============================================================== 
      Graph Style Property 
 ============================================================== --> 
 <element name="graphStyle" type="gml:GraphStylePropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation/> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="GraphStylePropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation/> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:GraphStyle" minOccurs="0"/> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 329 
 


 


  </sequence> 
  <attribute name="about" type="anyURI" use="optional"/> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ============================================================== 
      Graph Style 
 ============================================================== --> 
 <element name="GraphStyle" type="gml:GraphStyleType" substitutionGroup="gml:_GML"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>The style descriptor for a graph consisting of a number of features. Describes graph-specific style 
attributes.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="GraphStyleType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>[complexType of] The style descriptor for a graph consisting of a number of features. Describes 
graph-specific style attributes.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:BaseStyleDescriptorType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element name="planar" type="boolean" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element name="directed" type="boolean" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element name="grid" type="boolean" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element name="minDistance" type="double" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element name="minAngle" type="double" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element name="graphType" type="gml:GraphTypeType" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element name="drawingType" type="gml:DrawingTypeType" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element name="lineType" type="gml:LineTypeType" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element name="aestheticCriteria" type="gml:AesheticCriteriaType" minOccurs="0" 
maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ============================================================== 
      Common elements 
 ============================================================== --> 
 <element name="symbol" type="gml:SymbolType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>The symbol property. Extends the gml:AssociationType to allow for remote referencing of 
symbols.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="SymbolType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>[complexType of] The symbol property. Allows for remote referencing of symbols.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <any processContents="skip" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attribute name="symbolType" type="gml:SymbolTypeEnumeration" use="required"/> 
  <attribute ref="gml:transform" use="optional"/> 
  <attribute name="about" type="anyURI" use="optional"/> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <simpleType name="SymbolTypeEnumeration"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Used to specify the type of the symbol used.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <restriction base="string"> 
   <enumeration value="svg"/> 
   <enumeration value="xpath"/> 
   <enumeration value="other"/> 
  </restriction> 
 </simpleType> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


330  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="LabelType" mixed="true"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Label is mixed -- composed of text and XPath expressions used to extract the useful information 
from the feature.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element name="LabelExpression" type="string" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attribute ref="gml:transform" use="optional"/> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <attribute name="transform" type="string"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Defines the geometric transformation of entities. There is no particular grammar defined for this 
value.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </attribute> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="StyleVariationType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Used to vary individual graphic parameters and attributes of the style, symbol or 
text.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <simpleContent> 
   <extension base="string"> 
    <attribute name="styleProperty" type="string" use="required"/> 
    <attribute name="featurePropertyRange" type="string" use="optional"/> 
   </extension> 
  </simpleContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ============================================================== 
       Graph parameters types 
 ============================================================== --> 
 <simpleType name="GraphTypeType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Graph-specific styling property.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <restriction base="string"> 
   <enumeration value="TREE"/> 
   <enumeration value="BICONNECTED"/> 
  </restriction> 
 </simpleType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <simpleType name="DrawingTypeType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Graph-specific styling property.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <restriction base="string"> 
   <enumeration value="POLYLINE"/> 
   <enumeration value="ORTHOGONAL"/> 
  </restriction> 
 </simpleType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <simpleType name="LineTypeType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Graph-specific styling property.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <restriction base="string"> 
   <enumeration value="STRAIGHT"/> 
   <enumeration value="BENT"/> 
  </restriction> 
 </simpleType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <simpleType name="AesheticCriteriaType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Graph-specific styling property.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <restriction base="string"> 
   <enumeration value="MIN_CROSSINGS"/> 
   <enumeration value="MIN_AREA"/> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 331 
 


 


   <enumeration value="MIN_BENDS"/> 
   <enumeration value="MAX_BENDS"/> 
   <enumeration value="UNIFORM_BENDS"/> 
   <enumeration value="MIN_SLOPES"/> 
   <enumeration value="MIN_EDGE_LENGTH"/> 
   <enumeration value="MAX_EDGE_LENGTH"/> 
   <enumeration value="UNIFORM_EDGE_LENGTH"/> 
   <enumeration value="MAX_ANGULAR_RESOLUTION"/> 
   <enumeration value="MIN_ASPECT_RATIO"/> 
   <enumeration value="MAX_SYMMETRIES"/> 
  </restriction> 
 </simpleType> 
</schema> 


C.9 dictionary.xsd 


<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
<schema targetNamespace="http://www.opengis.net/gml" xmlns:gml="http://www.opengis.net/gml" 
xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" elementFormDefault="qualified" version="3.1.0"> 
 <annotation> 
  <appinfo source="urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-xsd:dictionary:v3.1.0"/> 
  <documentation> 
   Dictionary schema for GML 3.1.0  
   Components to support the lists of definitions.   
    </documentation> 
 </annotation> 
 <!-- ======================================================== 
       includes and imports 
 ======================================================== --> 
 <include schemaLocation="gmlBase.xsd"/> 
 <!-- ===================================================== --> 
 <!-- ===================================================== --> 
 <!-- === Dictionary and Definition components === --> 
 <!-- ===================================================== --> 
 <element name="Definition" type="gml:DefinitionType" substitutionGroup="gml:_GML"/> 
 <!-- ===================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="DefinitionType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A definition, which can be included in or referenced by a dictionary. In this extended type, the 
inherited "description" optional element can hold the definition whenever only text is needed. The inherited "name" elements can 
provide one or more brief terms for which this is the definition. The inherited "metaDataProperty" elements can be used to 
reference or include more information about this definition.   
The gml:id attribute is required - it must be possible to reference this definition using this handle.  </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:AbstractGMLType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:metaDataProperty" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:description" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:name" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute ref="gml:id" use="required"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ===================================================== --> 
 <element name="Dictionary" type="gml:DictionaryType" substitutionGroup="gml:Definition"/> 
 <element name="DefinitionCollection" type="gml:DictionaryType" substitutionGroup="gml:Definition"/> 
 <!-- ===================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="DictionaryType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A non-abstract bag that is specialized for use as a dictionary which contains a set of definitions. 
These definitions are referenced from other places, in the same and different XML documents. In this restricted type, the inherited 
optional "description" element can be used for a description of this dictionary. The inherited optional "name" element can be used 
for the name(s) of this dictionary. The inherited "metaDataProperty" elements can be used to reference or contain more 
information about this dictionary. The inherited required gml:id attribute allows the dictionary to be referenced using this handle. 
</documentation> 
  </annotation> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


332  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:DefinitionType"> 
    <choice minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
     <element ref="gml:dictionaryEntry"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>An entry in this dictionary. The content of an entry can itself be a lower level 
dictionary or definition collection. This element follows the standard GML property model, so the value may be provided directly or 
by reference. Note that if the value is provided by reference, this definition does not carry a handle (gml:id) in this context, so 
does not allow external references to this specific entry in this context. When used in this way the referenced definition will usually 
be in a dictionary in the same XML document. </documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
     <element ref="gml:indirectEntry"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>An identified reference to a remote entry in this dictionary, to be used when this 
entry should be identified to allow external references to this specific entry. </documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
    </choice> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ===================================================== --> 
 <element name="dictionaryEntry" type="gml:DictionaryEntryType"/> 
 <element name="definitionMember" type="gml:DictionaryEntryType" substitutionGroup="gml:dictionaryEntry"/> 
 <!-- ===================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="DictionaryEntryType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>An entry in a dictionary of definitions. An instance of this type contains or refers to a definition 
object.   
 
The number of definitions contained in this dictionaryEntry is restricted to one, but a DefinitionCollection or Dictionary that 
contains multiple definitions can be substituted if needed. Specialized descendents of this dictionaryEntry might be restricted in 
an application schema to allow only including specified types of definitions as valid entries in a dictionary. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:Definition" minOccurs="0"> 
    <annotation> 
     <documentation>This element in a dictionary entry contains the actual definition. </documentation> 
    </annotation> 
   </element> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"> 
   <annotation> 
    <documentation>A non-identified reference to a remote entry in this dictionary, to be used when this entry need 
not be identified to allow external references to this specific entry. The remote entry referenced will usually be in a dictionary in 
the same XML document. This element will usually be used in dictionaries that are inside of another dictionary. </documentation> 
   </annotation> 
  </attributeGroup> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ===================================================== --> 
 <element name="indirectEntry" type="gml:IndirectEntryType"/> 
 <!-- ===================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="IndirectEntryType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>An entry in a dictionary of definitions that contains a GML object which references a remote 
definition object. This entry is expected to be convenient in allowing multiple elements in one XML document to contain short 
(abbreviated XPointer) references, which are resolved to an external definition provided in a Dictionary element in the same XML 
document. Specialized descendents of this dictionaryEntry might be restricted in an application schema to allow only including 
specified types of definitions as valid entries in a dictionary. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:DefinitionProxy"/> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ===================================================== --> 
 <element name="DefinitionProxy" type="gml:DefinitionProxyType" substitutionGroup="gml:Definition"/> 
 <!-- ===================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="DefinitionProxyType"> 
  <annotation> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 333 
 


 


   <documentation>A proxy entry in a dictionary of definitions. An element of this type contains a reference to a remote 
definition object. This entry is expected to be convenient in allowing multiple elements in one XML document to contain short 
(abbreviated XPointer) references, which are resolved to an external definition provided in a Dictionary element in the same XML 
document. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:DefinitionType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:definitionRef"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>A reference to a remote entry in this dictionary, used when this dictionary entry is 
identified to allow external references to this specific entry. The remote entry referenced can be in a dictionary in the same or 
different XML document. </documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ===================================================== --> 
 <element name="definitionRef" type="gml:ReferenceType"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
</schema> 


C.10 direction.xsd 


<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
<xsd:schema targetNamespace="http://www.opengis.net/gml" xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink" 
xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" xmlns:xsd="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" 
xmlns:gml="http://www.opengis.net/gml" elementFormDefault="qualified" version="3.1.0"> 
 <xsd:annotation> 
  <xsd:appinfo source="urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-xsd:direction:v3.1.0">direction.xsd</xsd:appinfo> 
  <xsd:documentation> 
   This schema defines "direction" element and type. 
    </xsd:documentation> 
 </xsd:annotation> 
 <!-- ============================================================== 
       includes and imports 
 ============================================================== --> 
 <xsd:include schemaLocation="geometryBasic0d1d.xsd"/> 
 <!-- ============================================================== --> 
 <!--===================================================================  --> 
 <xsd:element name="direction" type="gml:DirectionPropertyType"/> 
 <!--===================================================================  --> 
 <xsd:complexType name="DirectionPropertyType"> 
  <xsd:annotation> 
   <xsd:documentation/> 
  </xsd:annotation> 
  <xsd:choice> 
   <xsd:element ref="gml:DirectionVector"/> 
   <xsd:element ref="gml:CompassPoint"/> 
   <xsd:element name="DirectionKeyword" type="gml:CodeType"/> 
   <xsd:element name="DirectionString" type="gml:StringOrRefType"/> 
  </xsd:choice> 
  <xsd:attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
 </xsd:complexType> 
 <!--===================================================================  --> 
 <xsd:element name="DirectionVector" type="gml:DirectionVectorType"/> 
 <!--===================================================================  --> 
 <xsd:complexType name="DirectionVectorType"> 
  <xsd:annotation> 
   <xsd:documentation>Direction expressed as a vector, either using components, or using angles.  
</xsd:documentation> 
  </xsd:annotation> 
  <xsd:choice> 
   <xsd:element ref="gml:vector"/> 
   <xsd:sequence> 
    <xsd:element name="horizontalAngle" type="gml:AngleType"/> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


334  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


    <xsd:element name="verticalAngle" type="gml:AngleType"/> 
   </xsd:sequence> 
  </xsd:choice> 
 </xsd:complexType> 
 <!--===================================================================  --> 
 <xsd:element name="CompassPoint" type="gml:CompassPointEnumeration"/> 
 <!--===================================================================  --> 
 <xsd:simpleType name="CompassPointEnumeration"> 
  <xsd:restriction base="string"> 
   <xsd:enumeration value="N"/> 
   <xsd:enumeration value="NNE"/> 
   <xsd:enumeration value="NE"/> 
   <xsd:enumeration value="ENE"/> 
   <xsd:enumeration value="E"/> 
   <xsd:enumeration value="ESE"/> 
   <xsd:enumeration value="SE"/> 
   <xsd:enumeration value="SSE"/> 
   <xsd:enumeration value="S"/> 
   <xsd:enumeration value="SSW"/> 
   <xsd:enumeration value="SW"/> 
   <xsd:enumeration value="WSW"/> 
   <xsd:enumeration value="W"/> 
   <xsd:enumeration value="WNW"/> 
   <xsd:enumeration value="NW"/> 
   <xsd:enumeration value="NNW"/> 
  </xsd:restriction> 
 </xsd:simpleType> 
 <!--===================================================================  --> 
</xsd:schema> 


C.11 dynamicFeature.xsd 


<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
<schema targetNamespace="http://www.opengis.net/gml" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" 
xmlns:gml="http://www.opengis.net/gml" elementFormDefault="qualified" version="3.1.0"> 
 <annotation> 
  <appinfo source="urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-xsd:dynamicFeature:v3.1.0"/> 
  <documentation xml:lang="en">      
    Basic support for tracking moving objects and objects with changing state.      
    Copyright (c) 2002 OGC, All Rights Reserved. 
    </documentation> 
 </annotation> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <include schemaLocation="feature.xsd"/> 
 <include schemaLocation="direction.xsd"/> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <element name="dataSource" type="gml:StringOrRefType"/> 
 <element name="status" type="gml:StringOrRefType"/> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <element name="_TimeSlice" type="gml:AbstractTimeSliceType" abstract="true" substitutionGroup="gml:_GML"/> 
 <!-- ===================================== --> 
 <complexType name="AbstractTimeSliceType" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation xml:lang="en"> 
        A timeslice encapsulates the time-varying properties of a dynamic feature--it  
        must be extended to represent a timestamped projection of a feature. The dataSource  
        property describes how the temporal data was acquired. 
      </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGMLType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:validTime"/> 
     <element ref="gml:dataSource" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <element name="MovingObjectStatus" type="gml:MovingObjectStatusType" substitutionGroup="gml:_TimeSlice"/> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 335 
 


 


 <!-- ===================================== --> 
 <complexType name="MovingObjectStatusType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation xml:lang="en"> 
             This type encapsulates various dynamic properties of moving objects         
             (points, lines, regions). It is useful for dealing with features whose         
             geometry or topology changes over time.       </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractTimeSliceType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:location"/> 
     <element name="speed" type="gml:MeasureType" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element name="bearing" type="gml:DirectionPropertyType" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element name="acceleration" type="gml:MeasureType" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element name="elevation" type="gml:MeasureType" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:status" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <element name="history" type="gml:HistoryPropertyType"/> 
 <!-- ===================================== --> 
 <complexType name="HistoryPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation xml:lang="en"> 
        The history relationship associates a feature with a sequence of TimeSlice instances. 
      </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:_TimeSlice" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <element name="track" type="gml:TrackType" substitutionGroup="gml:history"/> 
 <!-- ===================================== --> 
 <complexType name="TrackType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation xml:lang="en">       The track of a moving object is a sequence of specialized timeslices        that 
indicate the status of the object.       </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:HistoryPropertyType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:MovingObjectStatus" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <group name="dynamicProperties"> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:validTime" minOccurs="0"/> 
   <element ref="gml:history" minOccurs="0"/> 
   <element ref="gml:dataSource" minOccurs="0"/> 
  </sequence> 
 </group> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="DynamicFeatureType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A dynamic feature may possess a history and/or a timestamp.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractFeatureType"> 
    <group ref="gml:dynamicProperties"/> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


336  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 <!-- ===================================== --> 
 <complexType name="DynamicFeatureCollectionType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A dynamic feature collection may possess a history and/or a timestamp.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:FeatureCollectionType"> 
    <group ref="gml:dynamicProperties"/> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ===================================== --> 
</schema> 


C.12 feature.xsd 


<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
<schema targetNamespace="http://www.opengis.net/gml" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" 
xmlns:sch="http://www.ascc.net/xml/schematron" xmlns:gml="http://www.opengis.net/gml" elementFormDefault="qualified" 
version="3.1.0"> 
 <annotation> 
  <appinfo source="urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-xsd:feature:v3.1.0"/> 
  <documentation> 
             GML Feature schema.          
             Copyright (c) 2001-2003 OGC, All Rights Reserved.  
       </documentation> 
 </annotation> 
 <!-- ============================================================== --> 
 <!-- ==================        includes and imports  ======================= --> 
 <!-- ============================================================== --> 
 <include schemaLocation="geometryBasic2d.xsd"/> 
 <include schemaLocation="temporal.xsd"/> 
 <!-- ============================================================== --> 
 <element name="_Feature" type="gml:AbstractFeatureType" abstract="true" substitutionGroup="gml:_GML"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="AbstractFeatureType" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> An abstract feature provides a set of common properties, including id, metaDataProperty, name 
and description inherited from AbstractGMLType, plus boundedBy.    A concrete feature type must derive from this type and 
specify additional  properties in an application schema. A feature must possess an identifying attribute ('id' - 'fid' has been 
deprecated).  </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGMLType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:boundedBy" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:location" minOccurs="0"> 
      <annotation> 
       <appinfo>deprecated</appinfo> 
       <documentation>deprecated in GML version 3.1</documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
     <!-- additional properties must be specified in an application schema --> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ============================================================== --> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="boundedBy" type="gml:BoundingShapeType"/> 
 <!-- ====================================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="BoundingShapeType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Bounding shape.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <choice> 
    <element ref="gml:Envelope"/> 
    <element ref="gml:Null"/> 
   </choice> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 337 
 


 


  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="EnvelopeWithTimePeriod" type="gml:EnvelopeWithTimePeriodType" substitutionGroup="gml:Envelope"/> 
 <!-- ====================================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="EnvelopeWithTimePeriodType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Envelope that includes also a temporal extent.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:EnvelopeType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:timePosition" minOccurs="2" maxOccurs="2"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute name="frame" type="anyURI" use="optional" default="#ISO-8601"/> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ====================================================================== --> 
 <!-- ===== property for feature association ==== --> 
 <element name="featureMember" type="gml:FeaturePropertyType"/> 
 <element name="featureProperty" type="gml:FeaturePropertyType"/> 
 <!-- ============================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="FeaturePropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Container for a feature - follow gml:AssociationType pattern.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:_Feature" minOccurs="0"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ============================================================== --> 
 <!-- ===== property for association of an array of features ===== --> 
 <element name="featureMembers" type="gml:FeatureArrayPropertyType"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="FeatureArrayPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Container for features - follow gml:ArrayAssociationType pattern.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:_Feature" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ============================================================== --> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="_FeatureCollection" type="gml:AbstractFeatureCollectionType" abstract="true" 
substitutionGroup="gml:_Feature"/> 
 <!-- ===========================================================   --> 
 <complexType name="AbstractFeatureCollectionType" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> A feature collection contains zero or more features.  </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractFeatureType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:featureMember" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:featureMembers" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="FeatureCollection" type="gml:FeatureCollectionType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Feature"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="FeatureCollectionType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> Concrete generic feature collection.  </documentation> 
  </annotation> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


338  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractFeatureCollectionType"/> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ============================================================== --> 
 <!-- ============================================================== --> 
 <element name="LocationKeyWord" type="gml:CodeType"/> 
 <element name="LocationString" type="gml:StringOrRefType"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <!-- ============= common aliases for geometry properties =============== --> 
 <element name="centerOf" type="gml:PointPropertyType"/> 
 <element name="position" type="gml:PointPropertyType"/> 
 <element name="edgeOf" type="gml:CurvePropertyType"/> 
 <element name="centerLineOf" type="gml:CurvePropertyType"/> 
 <element name="extentOf" type="gml:SurfacePropertyType"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <!-- ================= deprecated components  =========================== --> 
 <complexType name="BoundedFeatureType" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> Makes boundedBy mandatory</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:AbstractFeatureType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <group ref="gml:StandardObjectProperties"/> 
     <element ref="gml:boundedBy"/> 
     <element ref="gml:location" minOccurs="0"> 
      <annotation> 
       <appinfo>deprecated</appinfo> 
       <documentation>deprecated in GML version 3.1</documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
    </sequence> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="location" type="gml:LocationPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Deprecated in GML 3.1.0</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- ============================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="LocationPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Convenience property for generalised location.   
      A representative location for plotting or analysis.   
      Often augmented by one or more additional geometry properties with more specific semantics.  </documentation> 
   <documentation>Deprecated in GML 3.1.0</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <choice> 
    <element ref="gml:_Geometry"/> 
    <element ref="gml:LocationKeyWord"/> 
    <element ref="gml:LocationString"/> 
    <element ref="gml:Null"/> 
   </choice> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ============================================================== --> 
 <element name="priorityLocation" type="gml:PriorityLocationPropertyType" substitutionGroup="gml:location"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Deprecated in GML 3.1.0</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- ============================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="PriorityLocationPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>G-XML component</documentation> 
   <documentation>Deprecated in GML 3.1.0</documentation> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 339 
 


 


  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:LocationPropertyType"> 
    <attribute name="priority" type="string" use="optional"/> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ============================================================== --> 
</schema> 


C.13 geometryAggregates.xsd 


<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
<schema targetNamespace="http://www.opengis.net/gml" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" 
xmlns:sch="http://www.ascc.net/xml/schematron" xmlns:gml="http://www.opengis.net/gml" 
xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink" elementFormDefault="qualified" version="3.1.0"> 
 <annotation> 
  <appinfo source="urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-
xsd:geometryAggregates:v3.1.0">geometryAggregates.xsd</appinfo> 
  <documentation> 
   Copyright (c) 2001-2002 OGC, All Rights Reserved. 
    </documentation> 
 </annotation> 
 <include schemaLocation="geometryPrimitives.xsd"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <!-- aggregate geometry objects --> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="_GeometricAggregate" type="gml:AbstractGeometricAggregateType" abstract="true" 
substitutionGroup="gml:_Geometry"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>The "_GeometricAggregate" element is the abstract head of the substituition group for all geometric 
aggremates.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="AbstractGeometricAggregateType" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>This is the abstract root type of the geometric aggregates.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGeometryType"/> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="MultiGeometry" type="gml:MultiGeometryType" substitutionGroup="gml:_GeometricAggregate"/> 
 <!-- ======================================================= --> 
 <complexType name="MultiGeometryType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> 
    A geometry collection must include one or more geometries, referenced through geometryMember elements. 
   </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGeometricAggregateType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <annotation> 
      <documentation>The members of the geometric aggregate can be specified either using the "standard" 
property or the array property style. It is also valid to use both the "standard" and the array property style in the same collection. 
NOTE: Array properties cannot reference remote geometry elements.</documentation> 
     </annotation> 
     <element ref="gml:geometryMember" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:geometryMembers" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


340  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 <element name="multiGeometryProperty" type="gml:MultiGeometryPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <appinfo> 
    <sch:pattern> 
     <sch:rule context="gml:multiGeometryProperty"> 
      <sch:extends rule="hrefOrContent"/> 
     </sch:rule> 
    </sch:pattern> 
   </appinfo> 
   <documentation>This property element either references a geometric aggregate via the XLink-attributes or contains 
the "multi geometry" element. multiGeometryProperty is the predefined property which can be used by GML Application Schemas 
whenever a GML Feature has a property with a value that is substitutable for _GeometricAggregate.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="MultiGeometryPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A property that has a geometric aggregate as its value domain can either be an appropriate 
geometry element encapsulated in an element of this type or an XLink reference to a remote geometry element (where remote 
includes geometry elements located elsewhere in the same document). Either the reference or the contained element must be 
given, but neither both nor none.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:_GeometricAggregate" minOccurs="0"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"> 
   <annotation> 
    <documentation>This attribute group includes the XLink attributes (see xlinks.xsd). XLink is used in GML to 
reference remote resources (including those elsewhere in the same document). A simple link element can be constructed by 
including a specific set of XLink attributes. The XML Linking Language (XLink) is currently a Proposed Recommendation of the 
World Wide Web Consortium. XLink allows elements to be inserted into XML documents so as to create sophisticated links 
between resources; such links can be used to reference remote properties. 
A simple link element can be used to implement pointer functionality, and this functionality has been built into various GML 3 
elements by including the gml:AssociationAttributeGroup.</documentation> 
   </annotation> 
  </attributeGroup> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="MultiPoint" type="gml:MultiPointType" substitutionGroup="gml:_GeometricAggregate"/> 
 <!-- ======================================================= --> 
 <complexType name="MultiPointType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> 
    A MultiPoint is defined by one or more Points, referenced through pointMember elements. 
   </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGeometricAggregateType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <annotation> 
      <documentation>The members of the geometric aggregate can be specified either using the "standard" 
property or the array property style. It is also valid to use both the "standard" and the array property style in the same collection. 
NOTE: Array properties cannot reference remote geometry elements.</documentation> 
     </annotation> 
     <element ref="gml:pointMember" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:pointMembers" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="multiPointProperty" type="gml:MultiPointPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <appinfo> 
    <sch:pattern> 
     <sch:rule context="gml:multiGeometryProperty"> 
      <sch:extends rule="hrefOrContent"/> 
     </sch:rule> 
    </sch:pattern> 
   </appinfo> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 341 
 


 


   <documentation>This property element either references a point aggregate via the XLink-attributes or contains the 
"multi point" element. multiPointProperty is the predefined property which can be used by GML Application Schemas whenever a 
GML Feature has a property with a value that is substitutable for MultiPoint.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="MultiPointPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A property that has a collection of points as its value domain can either be an appropriate geometry 
element encapsulated in an element of this type or an XLink reference to a remote geometry element (where remote includes 
geometry elements located elsewhere in the same document). Either the reference or the contained element must be given, but 
neither both nor none.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:MultiPoint" minOccurs="0"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"> 
   <annotation> 
    <documentation>This attribute group includes the XLink attributes (see xlinks.xsd). XLink is used in GML to 
reference remote resources (including those elsewhere in the same document). A simple link element can be constructed by 
including a specific set of XLink attributes. The XML Linking Language (XLink) is currently a Proposed Recommendation of the 
World Wide Web Consortium. XLink allows elements to be inserted into XML documents so as to create sophisticated links 
between resources; such links can be used to reference remote properties. 
A simple link element can be used to implement pointer functionality, and this functionality has been built into various GML 3 
elements by including the gml:AssociationAttributeGroup.</documentation> 
   </annotation> 
  </attributeGroup> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="MultiCurve" type="gml:MultiCurveType" substitutionGroup="gml:_GeometricAggregate"/> 
 <!-- ======================================================= --> 
 <complexType name="MultiCurveType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> 
    A MultiCurve is defined by one or more Curves, referenced through curveMember elements. 
   </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGeometricAggregateType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <annotation> 
      <documentation>The members of the geometric aggregate can be specified either using the "standard" 
property or the array property style. It is also valid to use both the "standard" and the array property style in the same collection. 
NOTE: Array properties cannot reference remote geometry elements.</documentation> 
     </annotation> 
     <element ref="gml:curveMember" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:curveMembers" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="multiCurveProperty" type="gml:MultiCurvePropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <appinfo> 
    <sch:pattern> 
     <sch:rule context="gml:multiCurveProperty"> 
      <sch:extends rule="hrefOrContent"/> 
     </sch:rule> 
    </sch:pattern> 
   </appinfo> 
   <documentation>This property element either references a curve aggregate via the XLink-attributes or contains the 
"multi curve" element. multiCurveProperty is the predefined property which can be used by GML Application Schemas whenever 
a GML Feature has a property with a value that is substitutable for MultiCurve.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="MultiCurvePropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


342  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


   <documentation>A property that has a collection of curves as its value domain can either be an appropriate geometry 
element encapsulated in an element of this type or an XLink reference to a remote geometry element (where remote includes 
geometry elements located elsewhere in the same document). Either the reference or the contained element must be given, but 
neither both nor none.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:MultiCurve" minOccurs="0"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"> 
   <annotation> 
    <documentation>This attribute group includes the XLink attributes (see xlinks.xsd). XLink is used in GML to 
reference remote resources (including those elsewhere in the same document). A simple link element can be constructed by 
including a specific set of XLink attributes. The XML Linking Language (XLink) is currently a Proposed Recommendation of the 
World Wide Web Consortium. XLink allows elements to be inserted into XML documents so as to create sophisticated links 
between resources; such links can be used to reference remote properties. 
A simple link element can be used to implement pointer functionality, and this functionality has been built into various GML 3 
elements by including the gml:AssociationAttributeGroup. 
    </documentation> 
   </annotation> 
  </attributeGroup> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="MultiSurface" type="gml:MultiSurfaceType" substitutionGroup="gml:_GeometricAggregate"/> 
 <!-- ======================================================= --> 
 <complexType name="MultiSurfaceType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> 
    A MultiSurface is defined by one or more Surfaces, referenced through surfaceMember elements.  
   </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGeometricAggregateType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <annotation> 
      <documentation>The members of the geometric aggregate can be specified either using the "standard" 
property or the array property style. It is also valid to use both the "standard" and the array property style in the same collection. 
NOTE: Array properties cannot reference remote geometry elements.</documentation> 
     </annotation> 
     <element ref="gml:surfaceMember" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:surfaceMembers" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="multiSurfaceProperty" type="gml:MultiSurfacePropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <appinfo> 
    <sch:pattern> 
     <sch:rule context="gml:multiSurfaceProperty"> 
      <sch:extends rule="hrefOrContent"/> 
     </sch:rule> 
    </sch:pattern> 
   </appinfo> 
   <documentation>This property element either references a surface aggregate via the XLink-attributes or contains the 
"multi surface" element. multiSurfaceProperty is the predefined property which can be used by GML Application Schemas 
whenever a GML Feature has a property with a value that is substitutable for MultiSurface.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="MultiSurfacePropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A property that has a collection of surfaces as its value domain can either be an appropriate 
geometry element encapsulated in an element of this type or an XLink reference to a remote geometry element (where remote 
includes geometry elements located elsewhere in the same document). Either the reference or the contained element must be 
given, but neither both nor none.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:MultiSurface" minOccurs="0"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 343 
 


 


   <annotation> 
    <documentation>This attribute group includes the XLink attributes (see xlinks.xsd). XLink is used in GML to 
reference remote resources (including those elsewhere in the same document). A simple link element can be constructed by 
including a specific set of XLink attributes. The XML Linking Language (XLink) is currently a Proposed Recommendation of the 
World Wide Web Consortium. XLink allows elements to be inserted into XML documents so as to create sophisticated links 
between resources; such links can be used to reference remote properties. 
A simple link element can be used to implement pointer functionality, and this functionality has been built into various GML 3 
elements by including the gml:AssociationAttributeGroup. 
    </documentation> 
   </annotation> 
  </attributeGroup> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ============================================================ --> 
 <element name="MultiSolid" type="gml:MultiSolidType" substitutionGroup="gml:_GeometricAggregate"/> 
 <!-- ======================================================= --> 
 <complexType name="MultiSolidType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> 
    A MultiSolid is defined by one or more Solids, referenced through solidMember elements.  
   </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGeometricAggregateType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <annotation> 
      <documentation>The members of the geometric aggregate can be specified either using the "standard" 
property or the array property style. It is also valid to use both the "standard" and the array property style in the same collection. 
NOTE: Array properties cannot reference remote geometry elements.</documentation> 
     </annotation> 
     <element ref="gml:solidMember" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:solidMembers" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="multiSolidProperty" type="gml:MultiSolidPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <appinfo> 
    <sch:pattern> 
     <sch:rule context="gml:multiSolidProperty"> 
      <sch:extends rule="hrefOrContent"/> 
     </sch:rule> 
    </sch:pattern> 
   </appinfo> 
   <documentation>This property element either references a solid aggregate via the XLink-attributes or contains the 
"multi solid" element. multiSolidProperty is the predefined property which can be used by GML Application Schemas whenever a 
GML Feature has a property with a value that is substitutable for MultiSolid.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="MultiSolidPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A property that has a collection of solids as its value domain can either be an appropriate geometry 
element encapsulated in an element of this type or an XLink reference to a remote geometry element (where remote includes 
geometry elements located elsewhere in the same document). Either the reference or the contained element must be given, but 
neither both nor none.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:MultiSolid" minOccurs="0"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"> 
   <annotation> 
    <documentation>This attribute group includes the XLink attributes (see xlinks.xsd). XLink is used in GML to 
reference remote resources (including those elsewhere in the same document). A simple link element can be constructed by 
including a specific set of XLink attributes. The XML Linking Language (XLink) is currently a Proposed Recommendation of the 
World Wide Web Consortium. XLink allows elements to be inserted into XML documents so as to create sophisticated links 
between resources; such links can be used to reference remote properties. 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


344  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


A simple link element can be used to implement pointer functionality, and this functionality has been built into various GML 3 
elements by including the gml:AssociationAttributeGroup. 
    </documentation> 
   </annotation> 
  </attributeGroup> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <!--  
  
 The following types and elements are deprecated and should not be used ! 
 For backward compatibility with GML2 only 
  
 --> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="MultiPolygon" type="gml:MultiPolygonType" substitutionGroup="gml:_GeometricAggregate"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Deprecated with GML 3.0 and included for backwards compatibility with GML 2. Use the 
"MultiSurface" element instead.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="MultiLineString" type="gml:MultiLineStringType" substitutionGroup="gml:_GeometricAggregate"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Deprecated with GML 3.0 and included for backwards compatibility with GML 2. Use the 
"MultiCurve" element instead.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="MultiLineStringType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> 
    A MultiLineString is defined by one or more LineStrings, referenced through lineStringMember elements. 
Deprecated with GML version 3.0. Use MultiCurveType instead. 
   </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGeometricAggregateType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:lineStringMember" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="MultiLineStringPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>This type is deprecated with GML 3 and shall not be used. It is included for backwards compatibility 
with GML 2. Use MultiCurvePropertyType instead. 
A property that has a collection of line strings as its value domain can either be an appropriate geometry element encapsulated in 
an element of this type or an XLink reference to a remote geometry element (where remote includes geometry elements located 
elsewhere in the same document). Either the reference or the contained element must be given, but neither both nor 
none.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:MultiLineString" minOccurs="0"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"> 
   <annotation> 
    <documentation>This attribute group includes the XLink attributes (see xlinks.xsd). XLink is used in GML to 
reference remote resources (including those elsewhere in the same document). A simple link element can be constructed by 
including a specific set of XLink attributes. The XML Linking Language (XLink) is currently a Proposed Recommendation of the 
World Wide Web Consortium. XLink allows elements to be inserted into XML documents so as to create sophisticated links 
between resources; such links can be used to reference remote properties. 
A simple link element can be used to implement pointer functionality, and this functionality has been built into various GML 3 
elements by including the gml:AssociationAttributeGroup. 
    </documentation> 
   </annotation> 
  </attributeGroup> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="MultiPolygonType"> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 345 
 


 


  <annotation> 
   <documentation> 
    A MultiPolygon is defined by one or more Polygons, referenced through polygonMember elements. Deprecated 
with GML version 3.0. Use MultiSurfaceType instead. 
   </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGeometricAggregateType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:polygonMember" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="MultiPolygonPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>This type is deprecated with GML 3 and shall not be used. It is included for backwards compatibility 
with GML 2. Use MultiSurfacePropertyType instead. 
 
A property that has a collection of polygons as its value domain can either be an appropriate geometry element encapsulated in 
an element of this type or an XLink reference to a remote geometry element (where remote includes geometry elements located 
elsewhere in the same document). Either the reference or the contained element must be given, but neither both nor 
none.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:MultiPolygon" minOccurs="0"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"> 
   <annotation> 
    <documentation>This attribute group includes the XLink attributes (see xlinks.xsd). XLink is used in GML to 
reference remote resources (including those elsewhere in the same document). A simple link element can be constructed by 
including a specific set of XLink attributes. The XML Linking Language (XLink) is currently a Proposed Recommendation of the 
World Wide Web Consortium. XLink allows elements to be inserted into XML documents so as to create sophisticated links 
between resources; such links can be used to reference remote properties. 
A simple link element can be used to implement pointer functionality, and this functionality has been built into various GML 3 
elements by including the gml:AssociationAttributeGroup. 
    </documentation> 
   </annotation> 
  </attributeGroup> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="geometryMember" type="gml:GeometryPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>This property element either references a geometry element via the XLink-attributes or contains the 
geometry element.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <element name="geometryMembers" type="gml:GeometryArrayPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>This property element contains a list of geometry elements. The order of the elements is significant 
and shall be preserved when processing the array.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <element name="pointMember" type="gml:PointPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>This property element either references a Point via the XLink-attributes or contains the Point 
element.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <element name="pointMembers" type="gml:PointArrayPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>This property element contains a list of points. The order of the elements is significant and shall be 
preserved when processing the array.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <element name="curveMembers" type="gml:CurveArrayPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


346  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


   <documentation>This property element contains a list of curves. The order of the elements is significant and shall be 
preserved when processing the array.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <element name="surfaceMember" type="gml:SurfacePropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>This property element either references a surface via the XLink-attributes or contains the surface 
element. A surface element is any element which is substitutable for "_Surface".</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <element name="surfaceMembers" type="gml:SurfaceArrayPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>This property element contains a list of surfaces. The order of the elements is significant and shall 
be preserved when processing the array.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <element name="solidMember" type="gml:SolidPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>This property element either references a solid via the XLink-attributes or contains the solid 
element. A solid element is any element which is substitutable for "_Solid".</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <element name="solidMembers" type="gml:SolidArrayPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>This property element contains a list of solids. The order of the elements is significant and shall be 
preserved when processing the array.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- some named geometry properties - for backward compatibility with GML2 --> 
 <element name="multiCenterOf" type="gml:MultiPointPropertyType"/> 
 <element name="multiPosition" type="gml:MultiPointPropertyType"/> 
 <element name="multiCenterLineOf" type="gml:MultiCurvePropertyType"/> 
 <element name="multiEdgeOf" type="gml:MultiCurvePropertyType"/> 
 <element name="multiCoverage" type="gml:MultiSurfacePropertyType"/> 
 <element name="multiExtentOf" type="gml:MultiSurfacePropertyType"/> 
 <!--  
  
 The following types and elements are deprecated and should not be used ! 
  
 --> 
 <element name="multiLocation" type="gml:MultiPointPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <appinfo>deprecated</appinfo> 
   <documentation>Deprecated with GML 3.0 and included only for backwards compatibility with GML 2.0. Use 
"curveMember" instead. 
This property element either references a line string via the XLink-attributes or contains the line string element.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <element name="lineStringMember" type="gml:LineStringPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <appinfo>deprecated</appinfo> 
   <documentation>Deprecated with GML 3.0 and included only for backwards compatibility with GML 2.0. Use 
"curveMember" instead. 
This property element either references a line string via the XLink-attributes or contains the line string element.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <element name="polygonMember" type="gml:PolygonPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <appinfo>deprecated</appinfo> 
   <documentation>Deprecated with GML 3.0 and included only for backwards compatibility with GML 2.0. Use 
"surfaceMember" instead. 
This property element either references a polygon via the XLink-attributes or contains the polygon element.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
</schema> 


C.14 geometryBasic0d1d.xsd 


<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 347 
 


 


<!-- edited with XMLSPY v2004 rel. 2 U (http://www.xmlspy.com) by David Burggraf (Galdos Systems Inc) --> 
<schema targetNamespace="http://www.opengis.net/gml" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" 
xmlns:sch="http://www.ascc.net/xml/schematron" xmlns:gml="http://www.opengis.net/gml" 
xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink" elementFormDefault="qualified" version="3.1.0"> 
 <annotation> 
  <appinfo source="urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-
xsd:geometryBasic0d1d:v3.1.0">geometryBasic0d1d.xsd</appinfo> 
  <appinfo source="urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-xsd:geometryBasic0d1d:v3.1.0"> 
   <sch:title>Schematron validation</sch:title> 
   <sch:pattern name="Check"> 
    <sch:rule abstract="true" id="CRSLabels"> 
     <sch:report test="not(@srsDimension) or @srsName"> 
            The presence of a dimension attribute implies the presence of the srsName attribute.</sch:report> 
     <sch:report test="not(@axisLabels) or @srsName"> 
            The presence of an axisLabels attribute implies the presence of the srsName attribute.</sch:report> 
     <sch:report test="not(@uomLabels) or @srsName"> 
            The presence of an uomLabels attribute implies the presence of the srsName attribute.</sch:report> 
     <sch:report test="(not(@uomLabels) and not(@axisLabels)) or (@uomLabels and @axisLabels)"> 
            The presence of an uomLabels attribute implies the presence of the axisLabels attribute and vice versa.</sch:report> 
    </sch:rule> 
   </sch:pattern> 
   <sch:pattern name="Check"> 
    <sch:rule abstract="true" id="Count"> 
     <sch:report test="not(@count) or @srsDimension"> 
            The presence of a count attribute implies the presence of the dimension attribute.</sch:report> 
    </sch:rule> 
   </sch:pattern> 
  </appinfo> 
  <documentation> 
        Copyright (c) 2001-2003 OGC, All Rights Reserved. 
    </documentation> 
 </annotation> 
 <!-- ============================================================== --> 
 <include schemaLocation="measures.xsd"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>This includes not only measures.xsd, but also units.xsd, gmlBase.xsd and 
basicTypes.xsd.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </include> 
 <!-- ============================================================== --> 
 <!-- ===========  abstract supertype for geometry objects =================== --> 
 <!-- ============================================================== --> 
 <element name="_Geometry" type="gml:AbstractGeometryType" abstract="true" substitutionGroup="gml:_GML"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>The "_Geometry" element is the abstract head of the substituition group for all geometry elements of 
GML 3. This includes pre-defined and user-defined geometry elements. Any geometry element must be a direct or indirect 
extension/restriction of AbstractGeometryType and must be directly or indirectly in the substitution group of 
"_Geometry".</documentation> 
   <appinfo> 
    <sch:pattern> 
     <sch:rule context="gml:_Geometry"> 
      <sch:extends rule="CRSLabels"/> 
     </sch:rule> 
    </sch:pattern> 
   </appinfo> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- ============================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="GeometryPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A geometric property can either be any geometry element encapsulated in an element of this type or 
an XLink reference to a remote geometry element (where remote includes geometry elements located elsewhere in the same 
document). Note that either the reference or the contained element must be given, but not both or none.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:_Geometry" minOccurs="0"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"> 
   <annotation> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


348  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


    <documentation>This attribute group includes the XLink attributes (see xlinks.xsd). XLink is used in GML to 
reference remote resources (including those elsewhere in the same document). A simple link element can be constructed by 
including a specific set of XLink attributes. The XML Linking Language (XLink) is currently a Proposed Recommendation of the 
World Wide Web Consortium. XLink allows elements to be inserted into XML documents so as to create sophisticated links 
between resources; such links can be used to reference remote properties. A simple link element can be used to implement 
pointer functionality, and this functionality has been built into various GML 3 elements by including the 
gml:AssociationAttributeGroup.</documentation> 
   </annotation> 
  </attributeGroup> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ============================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="GeometryArrayPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A container for an array of geometry elements. The elements are always contained in the array 
property, referencing geometry elements or arrays of geometry elements is not supported.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:_Geometry" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ============================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="AbstractGeometryType" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>All geometry elements are derived directly or indirectly from this abstract supertype. A geometry 
element may have an identifying attribute ("gml:id"), a name (attribute "name") and a description (attribute "description"). It may 
be associated with a spatial reference system (attribute "srsName"). The following rules shall be adhered: - Every geometry type 
shall derive from this abstract type. - Every geometry element (i.e. an element of a geometry type) shall be directly or indirectly in 
the substitution group of _Geometry.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGMLType"> 
    <attribute name="gid" type="string" use="optional"> 
     <annotation> 
      <documentation>This attribute is included for backward compatibility with GML 2 and is deprecated with 
GML 3. This identifer is superceded by "gml:id" inherited from AbstractGMLType. The attribute "gid" should not be used anymore 
and may be deleted in future versions of GML without further notice.</documentation> 
     </annotation> 
    </attribute> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:SRSReferenceGroup"/> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ============================================================== --> 
 <attributeGroup name="SRSReferenceGroup"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Optional reference to the CRS used by this geometry, with optional additional information to simplify 
use when a more complete definition of the CRS is not needed. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <attribute name="srsName" type="anyURI" use="optional"> 
   <annotation> 
    <documentation>In general this reference points to a CRS instance of gml:CoordinateReferenceSystemType 
(see coordinateReferenceSystems.xsd). For well known references it is not required that the CRS description exists at the 
location the URI points to. If no srsName attribute is given, the CRS must be specified as part of the larger context this geometry 
element is part of, e.g. a geometric element like point, curve, etc. It is expected that this attribute will be specified at the direct 
position level only in rare cases.</documentation> 
   </annotation> 
  </attribute> 
  <attribute name="srsDimension" type="positiveInteger" use="optional"> 
   <annotation> 
    <documentation>The "srsDimension" is the length of coordinate sequence (the number of entries in the list). This 
dimension is specified by the coordinate reference system. When the srsName attribute is omitted, this attribute shall be omitted. 
</documentation> 
   </annotation> 
  </attribute> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:SRSInformationGroup"/> 
 </attributeGroup> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <attributeGroup name="SRSInformationGroup"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Optional additional and redundant information for a CRS to simplify use when a more complete 
definition of the CRS is not needed. This information shall be the same as included in the more complete definition of the CRS, 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 349 
 


 


referenced by the srsName attribute. When the srsName attribute is included, either both or neither of the axisLabels and 
uomLabels attributes shall be included. When the srsName attribute is omitted, both of these attributes shall be omitted. 
</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <attribute name="axisLabels" type="gml:NCNameList" use="optional"> 
   <annotation> 
    <documentation>Ordered list of labels for all the axes of this CRS. The gml:axisAbbrev value should be used for 
these axis labels, after spaces and forbiddden characters are removed. When the srsName attribute is included, this attribute is 
optional. When the srsName attribute is omitted, this attribute shall also be omitted. </documentation> 
   </annotation> 
  </attribute> 
  <attribute name="uomLabels" type="gml:NCNameList" use="optional"> 
   <annotation> 
    <documentation>Ordered list of unit of measure (uom) labels for all the axes of this CRS. The value of the string 
in the gml:catalogSymbol should be used for this uom labels, after spaces and forbiddden characters are removed. When the 
axisLabels attribute is included, this attribute shall also be included. When the axisLabels attribute is omitted, this attribute shall 
also be omitted. </documentation> 
   </annotation> 
  </attribute> 
 </attributeGroup> 
 <!-- ============================================================== --> 
 <element name="_GeometricPrimitive" type="gml:AbstractGeometricPrimitiveType" abstract="true" 
substitutionGroup="gml:_Geometry"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>The "_GeometricPrimitive" element is the abstract head of the substituition group for all (pre- and 
user-defined) geometric primitives.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- ============================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="AbstractGeometricPrimitiveType" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>This is the abstract root type of the geometric primitives. A geometric primitive is a geometric object 
that is not decomposed further into other primitives in the system. All primitives are oriented in the direction implied by the 
sequence of their coordinate tuples.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGeometryType"/> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ============================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="GeometricPrimitivePropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A property that has a geometric primitive as its value domain can either be an appropriate geometry 
element encapsulated in an element of this type or an XLink reference to a remote geometry element (where remote includes 
geometry elements located elsewhere in the same document). Either the reference or the contained element must be given, but 
neither both nor none.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:_GeometricPrimitive" minOccurs="0"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"> 
   <annotation> 
    <documentation>This attribute group includes the XLink attributes (see xlinks.xsd). XLink is used in GML to 
reference remote resources (including those elsewhere in the same document). A simple link element can be constructed by 
including a specific set of XLink attributes. The XML Linking Language (XLink) is currently a Proposed Recommendation of the 
World Wide Web Consortium. XLink allows elements to be inserted into XML documents so as to create sophisticated links 
between resources; such links can be used to reference remote properties. A simple link element can be used to implement 
pointer functionality, and this functionality has been built into various GML 3 elements by including the 
gml:AssociationAttributeGroup.     </documentation> 
   </annotation> 
  </attributeGroup> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <!-- primitive geometry objects (0-dimensional) --> 
 <!-- ============================================================== --> 
 <element name="Point" type="gml:PointType" substitutionGroup="gml:_GeometricPrimitive"/> 
 <!-- ============================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="PointType"> 
  <annotation> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


350  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


   <documentation>A Point is defined by a single coordinate tuple.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGeometricPrimitiveType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <choice> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>GML supports two different ways to specify the direct poisiton of a point. 1. The 
"pos" element is of type DirectPositionType.</documentation> 
      </annotation> 
      <element ref="gml:pos"/> 
      <element ref="gml:coordinates"> 
       <annotation> 
        <documentation>Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0 for coordinates with ordinate values that are 
numbers. Use "pos" instead. The "coordinates" element shall only be used for coordinates with ordinates that require a string 
representation, e.g. DMS representations.</documentation> 
       </annotation> 
      </element> 
      <element ref="gml:coord"> 
       <annotation> 
        <documentation>Deprecated with GML version 3.0. Use "pos" instead. The "coord" element is 
included for backwards compatibility with GML 2.</documentation> 
       </annotation> 
      </element> 
     </choice> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ============================================================== --> 
 <element name="pointProperty" type="gml:PointPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <appinfo> 
    <sch:pattern> 
     <sch:rule context="gml:pointProperty"> 
      <sch:extends rule="hrefOrContent"/> 
     </sch:rule> 
    </sch:pattern> 
   </appinfo> 
   <documentation>This property element either references a point via the XLink-attributes or contains the point 
element. pointProperty is the predefined property which can be used by GML Application Schemas whenever a GML Feature has 
a property with a value that is substitutable for Point.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- ============================================================== --> 
 <element name="pointRep" type="gml:PointPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use "pointProperty" instead. Included for backwards 
compatibility with GML 3.0.0.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- ============================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="PointPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A property that has a point as its value domain can either be an appropriate geometry element 
encapsulated in an element of this type or an XLink reference to a remote geometry element (where remote includes geometry 
elements located elsewhere in the same document). Either the reference or the contained element must be given, but neither 
both nor none.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:Point" minOccurs="0"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"> 
   <annotation> 
    <documentation>This attribute group includes the XLink attributes (see xlinks.xsd). XLink is used in GML to 
reference remote resources (including those elsewhere in the same document). A simple link element can be constructed by 
including a specific set of XLink attributes. The XML Linking Language (XLink) is currently a Proposed Recommendation of the 
World Wide Web Consortium. XLink allows elements to be inserted into XML documents so as to create sophisticated links 
between resources; such links can be used to reference remote properties. A simple link element can be used to implement 
pointer functionality, and this functionality has been built into various GML 3 elements by including the 
gml:AssociationAttributeGroup.     </documentation> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 351 
 


 


   </annotation> 
  </attributeGroup> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ============================================================== --> 
 <element name="pointArrayProperty" type="gml:PointArrayPropertyType"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="PointArrayPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A container for an array of points. The elements are always contained in the array property, 
referencing geometry elements or arrays of geometry elements is not supported.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:Point" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <!-- primitive geometry objects (1-dimensional) --> 
 <!-- ============================================================== --> 
 <element name="_Curve" type="gml:AbstractCurveType" abstract="true" substitutionGroup="gml:_GeometricPrimitive"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>The "_Curve" element is the abstract head of the substituition group for all (continuous) curve 
elements.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- ============================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="AbstractCurveType" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>An abstraction of a curve to support the different levels of complexity. The curve can always be 
viewed as a geometric primitive, i.e. is continuous.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGeometricPrimitiveType"/> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ============================================================== --> 
 <element name="curveProperty" type="gml:CurvePropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <appinfo> 
    <sch:pattern> 
     <sch:rule context="gml:curveProperty"> 
      <sch:extends rule="hrefOrContent"/> 
     </sch:rule> 
    </sch:pattern> 
   </appinfo> 
   <documentation>This property element either references a curve via the XLink-attributes or contains the curve 
element. curveProperty is the predefined property which can be used by GML Application Schemas whenever a GML Feature 
has a property with a value that is substitutable for _Curve.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- ============================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="CurvePropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A property that has a curve as its value domain can either be an appropriate geometry element 
encapsulated in an element of this type or an XLink reference to a remote geometry element (where remote includes geometry 
elements located elsewhere in the same document). Either the reference or the contained element must be given, but neither 
both nor none.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:_Curve" minOccurs="0"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"> 
   <annotation> 
    <documentation>This attribute group includes the XLink attributes (see xlinks.xsd). XLink is used in GML to 
reference remote resources (including those elsewhere in the same document). A simple link element can be constructed by 
including a specific set of XLink attributes. The XML Linking Language (XLink) is currently a Proposed Recommendation of the 
World Wide Web Consortium. XLink allows elements to be inserted into XML documents so as to create sophisticated links 
between resources; such links can be used to reference remote properties. A simple link element can be used to implement 
pointer functionality, and this functionality has been built into various GML 3 elements by including the 
gml:AssociationAttributeGroup.     </documentation> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


352  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


   </annotation> 
  </attributeGroup> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ============================================================== --> 
 <element name="curveArrayProperty" type="gml:CurveArrayPropertyType"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="CurveArrayPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A container for an array of curves. The elements are always contained in the array property, 
referencing geometry elements or arrays of geometry elements is not supported.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:_Curve" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="LineString" type="gml:LineStringType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Curve"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="LineStringType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A LineString is a special curve that consists of a single segment with linear interpolation. It is 
defined by two or more coordinate tuples, with linear interpolation between them. It is backwards compatible with the LineString of 
GML 2, GM_LineString of ISO 19107 is implemented by LineStringSegment.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCurveType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <choice> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>GML supports two different ways to specify the control points of a line string. 1. A 
sequence of "pos" (DirectPositionType) or "pointProperty" (PointPropertyType) elements. "pos" elements are control points that 
are only part of this curve, "pointProperty" elements contain a point that may be referenced from other geometry elements or 
reference another point defined outside of this curve (reuse of existing points). 2. The "posList" element allows for a compact way 
to specifiy the coordinates of the control points, if all control points are in the same coordinate reference systems and belong to 
this curve only. The number of direct positions in the list must be at least two.</documentation> 
      </annotation> 
      <choice minOccurs="2" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
       <element ref="gml:pos"/> 
       <element ref="gml:pointProperty"/> 
       <element ref="gml:pointRep"> 
        <annotation> 
         <documentation>Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use "pointProperty" instead. Included 
for backwards compatibility with GML 3.0.0.</documentation> 
        </annotation> 
       </element> 
       <element ref="gml:coord"> 
        <annotation> 
         <documentation>Deprecated with GML version 3.0. Use "pos" instead. The "coord" element 
is included for backwards compatibility with GML 2.</documentation> 
        </annotation> 
       </element> 
      </choice> 
      <element ref="gml:posList"/> 
      <element ref="gml:coordinates"> 
       <annotation> 
        <documentation>Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use "posList" instead.</documentation> 
       </annotation> 
      </element> 
     </choice> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ============================================================== --> 
 <!-- positions --> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="pos" type="gml:DirectPositionType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <appinfo> 
    <sch:pattern> 
     <sch:rule context="gml:pos"> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 353 
 


 


      <sch:extends rule="CRSLabels"/> 
     </sch:rule> 
    </sch:pattern> 
   </appinfo> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- ============================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="DirectPositionType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>DirectPosition instances hold the coordinates for a position within some coordinate reference 
system (CRS). Since DirectPositions, as data types, will often be included in larger objects (such as geometry elements) that 
have references to CRS, the "srsName" attribute will in general be missing, if this particular DirectPosition is included in a larger 
element with such a reference to a CRS. In this case, the CRS is implicitly assumed to take on the value of the containing object's 
CRS.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <simpleContent> 
   <extension base="gml:doubleList"> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:SRSReferenceGroup"/> 
   </extension> 
  </simpleContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="posList" type="gml:DirectPositionListType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <appinfo> 
    <sch:pattern> 
     <sch:rule context="gml:posList"> 
      <sch:extends rule="CRSLabels"/> 
     </sch:rule> 
    </sch:pattern> 
   </appinfo> 
   <appinfo> 
    <sch:pattern> 
     <sch:rule context="gml:posList"> 
      <sch:extends rule="Count"/> 
     </sch:rule> 
    </sch:pattern> 
   </appinfo> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- ============================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="DirectPositionListType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>DirectPositionList instances hold the coordinates for a sequence of direct positions within the same 
coordinate reference system (CRS).</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <simpleContent> 
   <extension base="gml:doubleList"> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:SRSReferenceGroup"/> 
    <attribute name="count" type="positiveInteger" use="optional"> 
     <annotation> 
      <documentation>"count" allows to specify the number of direct positions in the list. If the attribute count 
is present then the attribute srsDimension shall be present, too.</documentation> 
     </annotation> 
    </attribute> 
   </extension> 
  </simpleContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ============================================================== --> 
 <element name="vector" type="gml:VectorType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <appinfo> 
    <sch:pattern> 
     <sch:rule context="gml:vector"> 
      <sch:extends rule="CRSLabels"/> 
     </sch:rule> 
    </sch:pattern> 
   </appinfo> 
  </annotation> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


354  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 </element> 
 <!-- ============================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="VectorType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A Vector is an ordered set of numbers called coordinates that represent a position in a coordinate 
reference system (CRS). For some application the components of the position may be adjusted to yield a unit 
vector.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <simpleContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:DirectPositionType"/> 
  </simpleContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ============================================================== --> 
 <group name="geometricPositionGroup"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A geometric position represented either by a DirectPosition or a Point.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <choice> 
   <element ref="gml:pos"/> 
   <element ref="gml:pointProperty"/> 
  </choice> 
 </group> 
 <!-- ============================================================== --> 
 <group name="geometricPositionListGroup"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A list of geometric positions represented either by a DirectPosition or a Point.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <choice> 
   <element ref="gml:posList"/> 
   <group ref="gml:geometricPositionGroup" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
  </choice> 
 </group> 
 <!-- ============================================================== --> 
 <element name="coordinates" type="gml:CoordinatesType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <!-- Envelope --> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="Envelope" type="gml:EnvelopeType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Geometry"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="EnvelopeType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Envelope defines an extent using a pair of positions defining opposite corners in arbitrary 
dimensions. The first direct position is the "lower corner" (a coordinate position consisting of all the minimal ordinates for each 
dimension for all points within the envelope), the second one the "upper corner" (a coordinate position consisting of all the 
maximal ordinates for each dimension for all points within the envelope).</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <choice> 
   <sequence> 
    <element name="lowerCorner" type="gml:DirectPositionType"/> 
    <element name="upperCorner" type="gml:DirectPositionType"/> 
   </sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:coord" minOccurs="2" maxOccurs="2"> 
    <annotation> 
     <appinfo>deprecated</appinfo> 
     <documentation>deprecated with GML version 3.0</documentation> 
    </annotation> 
   </element> 
   <element ref="gml:pos" minOccurs="2" maxOccurs="2"> 
    <annotation> 
     <appinfo>deprecated</appinfo> 
     <documentation>Deprecated with GML version 3.1. Use the explicit properties "lowerCorner" and 
"upperCorner" instead.</documentation> 
    </annotation> 
   </element> 
   <element ref="gml:coordinates"> 
    <annotation> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 355 
 


 


     <documentation>Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use the explicit properties "lowerCorner" and 
"upperCorner" instead.</documentation> 
    </annotation> 
   </element> 
  </choice> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:SRSReferenceGroup"/> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <!--     The following types and elements are deprecated and should not be used !    --> 
 <element name="coord" type="gml:CoordType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Deprecated with GML 3.0 and included for backwards compatibility with GML 2. Use the "pos" 
element instead.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <complexType name="CoordType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Represents a coordinate tuple in one, two, or three dimensions. Deprecated with GML 3.0 and 
replaced by DirectPositionType.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element name="X" type="decimal"/> 
   <element name="Y" type="decimal" minOccurs="0"/> 
   <element name="Z" type="decimal" minOccurs="0"/> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="lineStringProperty" type="gml:LineStringPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Deprecated with GML 3.0 and included only for backwards compatibility with GML 2.0. Use 
"curveProperty" instead. This property element either references a line string via the XLink-attributes or contains the line string 
element.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="LineStringPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>This type is deprecated with GML 3 and shall not be used. It is included for backwards compatibility 
with GML 2. Use CurvePropertyType instead. A property that has a line string as its value domain can either be an appropriate 
geometry element encapsulated in an element of this type or an XLink reference to a remote geometry element (where remote 
includes geometry elements located elsewhere in the same document). Either the reference or the contained element must be 
given, but neither both nor none.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:LineString" minOccurs="0"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"> 
   <annotation> 
    <documentation>This attribute group includes the XLink attributes (see xlinks.xsd). XLink is used in GML to 
reference remote resources (including those elsewhere in the same document). A simple link element can be constructed by 
including a specific set of XLink attributes. The XML Linking Language (XLink) is currently a Proposed Recommendation of the 
World Wide Web Consortium. XLink allows elements to be inserted into XML documents so as to create sophisticated links 
between resources; such links can be used to reference remote properties. A simple link element can be used to implement 
pointer functionality, and this functionality has been built into various GML 3 elements by including the 
gml:AssociationAttributeGroup.</documentation> 
   </annotation> 
  </attributeGroup> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
</schema> 


C.15 geometryBasic2d.xsd 


<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
<!-- edited with XMLSPY v5 rel. 2 U (http://www.xmlspy.com) by Clemens Portele (interactive instruments) --> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


356  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


<schema targetNamespace="http://www.opengis.net/gml" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" 
xmlns:sch="http://www.ascc.net/xml/schematron" xmlns:gml="http://www.opengis.net/gml" 
xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink" elementFormDefault="qualified" version="3.1.0"> 
 <annotation> 
  <appinfo source="urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-xsd:geometryBasic2d:v3.1.0">geometryBasic2d.xsd</appinfo> 
  <documentation> 
   Copyright (c) 2001-2003 OGC, All Rights Reserved. 
    </documentation> 
 </annotation> 
 <include schemaLocation="geometryBasic0d1d.xsd"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <!-- primitive geometry objects (2-dimensional) --> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="_Surface" type="gml:AbstractSurfaceType" abstract="true" substitutionGroup="gml:_GeometricPrimitive"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>The "_Surface" element is the abstract head of the substituition group for all (continuous) surface 
elements.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="AbstractSurfaceType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> 
    An abstraction of a surface to support the different levels of complexity. A surface is always a continuous region 
of a plane. 
   </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGeometricPrimitiveType"/> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="surfaceProperty" type="gml:SurfacePropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <appinfo> 
    <sch:pattern> 
     <sch:rule context="gml:surfaceProperty"> 
      <sch:extends rule="hrefOrContent"/> 
     </sch:rule> 
    </sch:pattern> 
   </appinfo> 
   <documentation>This property element either references a surface via the XLink-attributes or contains the surface 
element. surfaceProperty is the predefined property which can be used by GML Application Schemas whenever a GML Feature 
has a property with a value that is substitutable for _Surface.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="SurfacePropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A property that has a surface as its value domain can either be an appropriate geometry element 
encapsulated in an element of this type or an XLink reference to a remote geometry element (where remote includes geometry 
elements located elsewhere in the same document). Either the reference or the contained element must be given, but neither 
both nor none.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:_Surface" minOccurs="0"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"> 
   <annotation> 
    <documentation>This attribute group includes the XLink attributes (see xlinks.xsd). XLink is used in GML to 
reference remote resources (including those elsewhere in the same document). A simple link element can be constructed by 
including a specific set of XLink attributes. The XML Linking Language (XLink) is currently a Proposed Recommendation of the 
World Wide Web Consortium. XLink allows elements to be inserted into XML documents so as to create sophisticated links 
between resources; such links can be used to reference remote properties. 
A simple link element can be used to implement pointer functionality, and this functionality has been built into various GML 3 
elements by including the gml:AssociationAttributeGroup. 
    </documentation> 
   </annotation> 
  </attributeGroup> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 357 
 


 


 <element name="surfaceArrayProperty" type="gml:SurfaceArrayPropertyType"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="SurfaceArrayPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A container for an array of surfaces. The elements are always contained in the array property, 
referencing geometry elements or arrays of geometry elements is not supported.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:_Surface" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="Polygon" type="gml:PolygonType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Surface"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="PolygonType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A Polygon is a special surface that is defined by a single surface patch. The boundary of this patch 
is coplanar and the polygon uses planar interpolation in its interior. It is backwards compatible with the Polygon of GML 2, 
GM_Polygon of ISO 19107 is implemented by PolygonPatch.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractSurfaceType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:exterior" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:interior" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <!-- rings (closed curves for surface boundaries) --> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="_Ring" type="gml:AbstractRingType" abstract="true" substitutionGroup="gml:_Geometry"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>The "_Ring" element is the abstract head of the substituition group for all closed boundaries of a 
surface patch.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="AbstractRingType" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> 
    An abstraction of a ring to support surface boundaries of different complexity. 
   </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGeometryType"/> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="exterior" type="gml:AbstractRingPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A boundary of a surface consists of a number of rings. In the normal 2D case, one of these rings is 
distinguished as being the exterior boundary. In a general manifold this is not always possible, in which case all boundaries shall 
be listed as interior boundaries, and the exterior will be empty.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <element name="interior" type="gml:AbstractRingPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A boundary of a surface consists of a number of rings. The "interior" rings seperate the surface / 
surface patch from the area enclosed by the rings.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <element name="outerBoundaryIs" type="gml:AbstractRingPropertyType" substitutionGroup="gml:exterior"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> 
    Deprecated with GML 3.0, included only for backwards compatibility with GML 2. Use "exterior" instead. 
   </documentation> 
  </annotation> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


358  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 </element> 
 <element name="innerBoundaryIs" type="gml:AbstractRingPropertyType" substitutionGroup="gml:interior"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> 
    Deprecated with GML 3.0, included only for backwards compatibility with GML 2. Use "interior" instead. 
   </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="AbstractRingPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> 
           Encapsulates a ring to represent the surface boundary property of a surface. 
   </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:_Ring"/> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="LinearRing" type="gml:LinearRingType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Ring"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="LinearRingType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A LinearRing is defined by four or more coordinate tuples, with linear interpolation between them; 
the first and last coordinates must be coincident.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractRingType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <choice> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>GML supports two different ways to specify the control points of a linear ring. 
1. A sequence of "pos" (DirectPositionType) or "pointProperty" (PointPropertyType) elements. "pos" elements are control points 
that are only part of this ring, "pointProperty" elements contain a point that may be referenced from other geometry elements or 
reference another point defined outside of this ring (reuse of existing points). 
2. The "posList" element allows for a compact way to specifiy the coordinates of the control points, if all control points are in the 
same coordinate reference systems and belong to this ring only. The number of direct positions in the list must be at least 
four.</documentation> 
      </annotation> 
      <choice minOccurs="4" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
       <element ref="gml:pos"/> 
       <element ref="gml:pointProperty"/> 
       <element ref="gml:pointRep"> 
        <annotation> 
         <documentation>Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use "pointProperty" instead. Included 
for backwards compatibility with GML 3.0.0.</documentation> 
        </annotation> 
       </element> 
      </choice> 
      <element ref="gml:posList"/> 
      <element ref="gml:coordinates"> 
       <annotation> 
        <documentation>Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use "posList" instead.</documentation> 
       </annotation> 
      </element> 
      <element ref="gml:coord" minOccurs="4" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
       <annotation> 
        <documentation>Deprecated with GML version 3.0 and included for backwards compatibility with 
GML 2. Use "pos" elements instead.</documentation> 
       </annotation> 
      </element> 
     </choice> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="LinearRingPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 359 
 


 


           Encapsulates a ring to represent properties in features or geometry collections. 
   </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <choice> 
   <element ref="gml:LinearRing"/> 
  </choice> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <!--  
  
 The following types and elements are deprecated and should not be used ! 
  
 --> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="polygonProperty" type="gml:PolygonPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Deprecated with GML 3.0 and included only for backwards compatibility with GML 2.0. Use 
"surfaceProperty" instead. 
This property element either references a polygon via the XLink-attributes or contains the polygon element.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="PolygonPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>This type is deprecated with GML 3 and shall not be used. It is included for backwards compatibility 
with GML 2. Use SurfacePropertyType instead. 
A property that has a polygon as its value domain can either be an appropriate geometry element encapsulated in an element of 
this type or an XLink reference to a remote geometry element (where remote includes geometry elements located elsewhere in 
the same document). Either the reference or the contained element must be given, but neither both nor none.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:Polygon" minOccurs="0"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"> 
   <annotation> 
    <documentation>This attribute group includes the XLink attributes (see xlinks.xsd). XLink is used in GML to 
reference remote resources (including those elsewhere in the same document). A simple link element can be constructed by 
including a specific set of XLink attributes. The XML Linking Language (XLink) is currently a Proposed Recommendation of the 
World Wide Web Consortium. XLink allows elements to be inserted into XML documents so as to create sophisticated links 
between resources; such links can be used to reference remote properties. 
A simple link element can be used to implement pointer functionality, and this functionality has been built into various GML 3 
elements by including the gml:AssociationAttributeGroup.</documentation> 
   </annotation> 
  </attributeGroup> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
</schema> 


C.16 geometryComplexes.xsd 


<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
<schema targetNamespace="http://www.opengis.net/gml" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" 
xmlns:sch="http://www.ascc.net/xml/schematron" xmlns:gml="http://www.opengis.net/gml" 
xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink" elementFormDefault="qualified" version="3.1.0"> 
 <annotation> 
  <appinfo source="urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-
xsd:geometryComplexes:v3.1.0">geometryComplexes.xsd</appinfo> 
  <documentation> 
   Copyright (c) 2001-2002 OGC, All Rights Reserved. 
    </documentation> 
 </annotation> 
 <include schemaLocation="geometryAggregates.xsd"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="CompositeCurve" type="gml:CompositeCurveType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Curve"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="CompositeCurveType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


360  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


    A CompositeCurve is defined by a sequence of (orientable) curves such that the each curve in the sequence 
terminates at the start point of the subsequent curve in the list. 
   </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCurveType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:curveMember" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>This element references or contains one curve in the composite curve. The curves 
are contiguous, the collection of curves is ordered. 
NOTE: This definition allows for a nested structure, i.e. a CompositeCurve may use, for example, another CompositeCurve as a 
curve member.</documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ============================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="CompositeCurvePropertyType"> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:CompositeCurve" minOccurs="0"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="CompositeSurface" type="gml:CompositeSurfaceType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Surface"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="CompositeSurfaceType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A CompositeSurface is defined by a set of orientable surfaces. A composite surface is geometry 
type with all the geometric properties of a (primitive) surface. Essentially, a composite surface is a collection of surfaces that join 
in pairs on common boundary curves and which, when considered as a whole, form a single surface. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractSurfaceType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:surfaceMember" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>This element references or contains one surface in the composite surface. The 
surfaces are contiguous. 
NOTE: This definition allows for a nested structure, i.e. a CompositeSurface may use, for example, another CompositeSurface as 
a member.</documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ============================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="CompositeSurfacePropertyType"> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:CompositeSurface" minOccurs="0"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="CompositeSolid" type="gml:CompositeSolidType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Solid"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="CompositeSolidType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> 
    A composite solid is a geometry type with all the geometric properties of a (primitive) solid.  
    Essentially, a composite solid is a collection of solids that join in pairs on common boundary surfaces and which, 
when considered as a whole, form a single solid.  
   </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractSolidType"> 
    <sequence> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 361 
 


 


     <element ref="gml:solidMember" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
      <annotation> 
       <appinfo> 
        <sch:pattern> 
         <sch:rule context="gml:solidMember"> 
          <sch:extends rule="hrefOrContent"/> 
         </sch:rule> 
        </sch:pattern> 
       </appinfo> 
       <documentation>This element references or contains one solid in the composite solid. The solids are 
contiguous. 
NOTE: This definition allows for a nested structure, i.e. a CompositeSolid may use, for example, another CompositeSolid as a 
member.</documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ============================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="CompositeSolidPropertyType"> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:CompositeSolid" minOccurs="0"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <!-- complex/composite geometry objects --> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="GeometricComplex" type="gml:GeometricComplexType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Geometry"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="GeometricComplexType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> 
    A geometric complex. 
   </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGeometryType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element name="element" type="gml:GeometricPrimitivePropertyType" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="GeometricComplexPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A property that has a geometric complex as its value domain can either be an appropriate geometry 
element encapsulated in an element of this type or an XLink reference to a remote geometry element (where remote includes 
geometry elements located elsewhere in the same document). Either the reference or the contained element must be given, but 
neither both nor none. 
NOTE: The allowed geometry elements contained in such a property (or referenced by it) have to be modelled by an XML 
Schema choice element since the composites inherit both from geometric complex *and* geometric primitive and are already part 
of the _GeometricPrimitive substitution group.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <choice minOccurs="0"> 
   <element ref="gml:GeometricComplex"/> 
   <element ref="gml:CompositeCurve"/> 
   <element ref="gml:CompositeSurface"/> 
   <element ref="gml:CompositeSolid"/> 
  </choice> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"> 
   <annotation> 
    <documentation>This attribute group includes the XLink attributes (see xlinks.xsd). XLink is used in GML to 
reference remote resources (including those elsewhere in the same document). A simple link element can be constructed by 
including a specific set of XLink attributes. The XML Linking Language (XLink) is currently a Proposed Recommendation of the 
World Wide Web Consortium. XLink allows elements to be inserted into XML documents so as to create sophisticated links 
between resources; such links can be used to reference remote properties. 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


362  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


A simple link element can be used to implement pointer functionality, and this functionality has been built into various GML 3 
elements by including the gml:AssociationAttributeGroup.</documentation> 
   </annotation> 
  </attributeGroup> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
</schema> 


C.17 geometryPrimitives.xsd 


<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
<!-- edited with XMLSPY v5 rel. 2 U (http://www.xmlspy.com) by Clemens Portele (interactive instruments) --> 
<schema targetNamespace="http://www.opengis.net/gml" xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink" 
xmlns:gml="http://www.opengis.net/gml" xmlns:sch="http://www.ascc.net/xml/schematron" 
xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" elementFormDefault="qualified" version="3.1.0"> 
 <annotation> 
  <appinfo source="urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-
xsd:geometryPrimitives:v3.1.0">geometryPrimitives.xsd</appinfo> 
  <documentation> 
   Copyright (c) 2001-2003 OGC, All Rights Reserved. 
    </documentation> 
 </annotation> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <include schemaLocation="geometryBasic2d.xsd"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="Curve" type="gml:CurveType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Curve"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="CurveType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> 
    Curve is a 1-dimensional primitive. Curves are continuous, connected, and have a measurable length in terms of 
the coordinate system.  
    A curve is composed of one or more curve segments. Each curve segment within a curve may be defined using a 
different interpolation method. The curve segments are connected to one another, with the end point of each segment except the 
last being the start point of the next segment in the segment list. 
    The orientation of the curve is positive. 
   </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCurveType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:segments"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>This element encapsulates the segments of the curve.</documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="baseCurve" type="gml:CurvePropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <appinfo> 
    <sch:pattern> 
     <sch:rule context="gml:baseCurve"> 
      <sch:extends rule="hrefOrContent"/> 
     </sch:rule> 
    </sch:pattern> 
   </appinfo> 
   <documentation>This property element either references a curve via the XLink-attributes or contains the curve 
element. A curve element is any element which is substitutable for "_Curve".</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="OrientableCurve" type="gml:OrientableCurveType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Curve"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="OrientableCurveType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 363 
 


 


    OrientableCurve consists of a curve and an orientation. If the orientation is "+", then the OrientableCurve is 
identical to the baseCurve. If the orientation is "-", then the OrientableCurve is related to another _Curve with a parameterization 
that reverses the sense of the curve traversal. 
   </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCurveType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:baseCurve"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>References or contains the base curve (positive orientation). 
NOTE: This definition allows for a nested structure, i.e. an OrientableCurve may use another OrientableCurve as its base 
curve.</documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute name="orientation" type="gml:SignType" default="+"> 
     <annotation> 
      <documentation>If the orientation is "+", then the OrientableCurve is identical to the baseCurve. If the 
orientation is "-", then the OrientableCurve is related to another _Curve with a parameterization that reverses the sense of the 
curve traversal. "+" is the default value.</documentation> 
     </annotation> 
    </attribute> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <!-- curve segments (1-dimensional) --> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="_CurveSegment" type="gml:AbstractCurveSegmentType" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>The "_CurveSegment" element is the abstract head of the substituition group for all curve segment 
elements, i.e. continuous segments of the same interpolation mechanism.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="AbstractCurveSegmentType" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> 
    Curve segment defines a homogeneous segment of a curve. 
   </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <attribute name="numDerivativesAtStart" type="integer" use="optional" default="0"> 
   <annotation> 
    <documentation>The attribute "numDerivativesAtStart" specifies the type of continuity between this curve 
segment and its predecessor. If this is the first curve segment in the curve, one of these values, as appropriate, is ignored. The 
default value of "0" means simple continuity, which is a mandatory minimum level of continuity. This level is referred to as "C 0 " 
in mathematical texts. A value of 1 means that the function and its first derivative are continuous at the appropriate end point: "C 
1 " continuity. A value of "n" for any integer means the function and its first n derivatives are continuous: "C n " continuity. 
NOTE: Use of these values is only appropriate when the basic curve definition is an underdetermined system. For example, line 
string segments cannot support continuity above C 0 , since there is no spare control parameter to adjust the incoming angle at 
the end points of the segment. Spline functions on the other hand often have extra degrees of freedom on end segments that 
allow them to adjust the values of the derivatives to support C 1 or higher continuity.</documentation> 
   </annotation> 
  </attribute> 
  <attribute name="numDerivativesAtEnd" type="integer" use="optional" default="0"> 
   <annotation> 
    <documentation>The attribute "numDerivativesAtEnd" specifies the type of continuity between this curve segment 
and its successor. If this is the last curve segment in the curve, one of these values, as appropriate, is ignored. The default value 
of "0" means simple continuity, which is a mandatory minimum level of continuity. This level is referred to as "C 0 " in 
mathematical texts. A value of 1 means that the function and its first derivative are continuous at the appropriate end point: "C 1 " 
continuity. A value of "n" for any integer means the function and its first n derivatives are continuous: "C n " continuity. 
NOTE: Use of these values is only appropriate when the basic curve definition is an underdetermined system. For example, line 
string segments cannot support continuity above C 0 , since there is no spare control parameter to adjust the incoming angle at 
the end points of the segment. Spline functions on the other hand often have extra degrees of freedom on end segments that 
allow them to adjust the values of the derivatives to support C 1 or higher continuity.</documentation> 
   </annotation> 
  </attribute> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


364  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


  <attribute name="numDerivativeInterior" type="integer" use="optional" default="0"> 
   <annotation> 
    <documentation>The attribute "numDerivativesInterior" specifies the type of continuity that is guaranteed interior 
to the curve. The default value of "0" means simple continuity, which is a mandatory minimum level of continuity. This level is 
referred to as "C 0 " in mathematical texts. A value of 1 means that the function and its first derivative are continuous at the 
appropriate end point: "C 1 " continuity. A value of "n" for any integer means the function and its first n derivatives are continuous: 
"C n " continuity. 
NOTE: Use of these values is only appropriate when the basic curve definition is an underdetermined system. For example, line 
string segments cannot support continuity above C 0 , since there is no spare control parameter to adjust the incoming angle at 
the end points of the segment. Spline functions on the other hand often have extra degrees of freedom on end segments that 
allow them to adjust the values of the derivatives to support C 1 or higher continuity.</documentation> 
   </annotation> 
  </attribute> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="segments" type="gml:CurveSegmentArrayPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>This property element contains a list of curve segments. The order of the elements is significant and 
shall be preserved when processing the array.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="CurveSegmentArrayPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A container for an array of curve segments.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:_CurveSegment" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========== global element in "_CurveSegment" substitution group ================ --> 
 <element name="LineStringSegment" type="gml:LineStringSegmentType" substitutionGroup="gml:_CurveSegment"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="LineStringSegmentType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> 
    A LineStringSegment is a curve segment that is defined by two or more coordinate tuples, with linear interpolation 
between them. 
    Note: LineStringSegment implements GM_LineString of ISO 19107. 
   </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCurveSegmentType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <choice> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>GML supports two different ways to specify the control points of a curve segment. 
1. A sequence of "pos" (DirectPositionType) or "pointProperty" (PointPropertyType) elements. "pos" elements are control points 
that are only part of this curve segment, "pointProperty" elements contain a point that may be referenced from other geometry 
elements or reference another point defined outside of this curve segment (reuse of existing points). 
2. The "posList" element allows for a compact way to specifiy the coordinates of the control points, if all control points are in the 
same coordinate reference systems and belong to this curve segment only. The number of direct positions in the list must be at 
least two.</documentation> 
      </annotation> 
      <choice minOccurs="2" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
       <element ref="gml:pos"/> 
       <element ref="gml:pointProperty"/> 
       <element ref="gml:pointRep"> 
        <annotation> 
         <documentation>Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use "pointProperty" instead. Included 
for backwards compatibility with GML 3.0.0.</documentation> 
        </annotation> 
       </element> 
      </choice> 
      <element ref="gml:posList"/> 
      <element ref="gml:coordinates"> 
       <annotation> 
        <documentation>Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use "posList" instead.</documentation> 
       </annotation> 
      </element> 
     </choice> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 365 
 


 


    </sequence> 
    <attribute name="interpolation" type="gml:CurveInterpolationType" fixed="linear"> 
     <annotation> 
      <documentation>The attribute "interpolation" specifies the curve interpolation mechanism used for this 
segment. This mechanism 
uses the control points and control parameters to determine the position of this curve segment. For a LineStringSegment the 
interpolation is fixed as "linear".</documentation> 
     </annotation> 
    </attribute> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========== global element in "_CurveSegment" substitution group ================ --> 
 <element name="ArcString" type="gml:ArcStringType" substitutionGroup="gml:_CurveSegment"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="ArcStringType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> 
    An ArcString is a curve segment that uses three-point circular arc interpolation. 
   </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCurveSegmentType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <choice> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>GML supports two different ways to specify the control points of a curve segment. 
1. A sequence of "pos" (DirectPositionType) or "pointProperty" (PointPropertyType) elements. "pos" elements are control points 
that are only part of this curve segment, "pointProperty" elements contain a point that may be referenced from other geometry 
elements or reference another point defined outside of this curve segment (reuse of existing points). 
2. The "posList" element allows for a compact way to specifiy the coordinates of the control points, if all control points are in the 
same coordinate reference systems and belong to this curve segment only. The number of direct positions in the list must be at 
least three.</documentation> 
      </annotation> 
      <choice minOccurs="3" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
       <element ref="gml:pos"/> 
       <element ref="gml:pointProperty"/> 
       <element ref="gml:pointRep"> 
        <annotation> 
         <documentation>Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use "pointProperty" instead. Included 
for backwards compatibility with GML 3.0.0.</documentation> 
        </annotation> 
       </element> 
      </choice> 
      <element ref="gml:posList"/> 
      <element ref="gml:coordinates"> 
       <annotation> 
        <documentation>Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use "posList" instead.</documentation> 
       </annotation> 
      </element> 
     </choice> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute name="interpolation" type="gml:CurveInterpolationType" fixed="circularArc3Points"> 
     <annotation> 
      <documentation>The attribute "interpolation" specifies the curve interpolation mechanism used for this 
segment. This mechanism 
uses the control points and control parameters to determine the position of this curve segment. For an ArcString the interpolation 
is fixed as "circularArc3Points".</documentation> 
     </annotation> 
    </attribute> 
    <attribute name="numArc" type="integer" use="optional"> 
     <annotation> 
      <documentation>The number of arcs in the arc string can be explicitly stated in this attribute. The number 
of control points in the arc string must be 2 * numArc + 1.</documentation> 
     </annotation> 
    </attribute> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


366  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 <!-- =========== global element in "_CurveSegment" substitution group ================ --> 
 <element name="Arc" type="gml:ArcType" substitutionGroup="gml:ArcString"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="ArcType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> 
    An Arc is an arc string with only one arc unit, i.e. three control points. 
   </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:ArcStringType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <choice> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>GML supports two different ways to specify the control points of a curve segment. 
1. A sequence of "pos" (DirectPositionType) or "pointProperty" (PointPropertyType) elements. "pos" elements are control points 
that are only part of this curve segment, "pointProperty" elements contain a point that may be referenced from other geometry 
elements or reference another point defined outside of this curve segment (reuse of existing points). 
2. The "posList" element allows for a compact way to specifiy the coordinates of the control points, if all control points are in the 
same coordinate reference systems and belong to this curve segment only. The number of direct positions in the list must be 
three.</documentation> 
      </annotation> 
      <choice minOccurs="3" maxOccurs="3"> 
       <element ref="gml:pos"/> 
       <element ref="gml:pointProperty"/> 
       <element ref="gml:pointRep"> 
        <annotation> 
         <documentation>Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use "pointProperty" instead. Included 
for backwards compatibility with GML 3.0.0.</documentation> 
        </annotation> 
       </element> 
      </choice> 
      <element ref="gml:posList"/> 
      <element ref="gml:coordinates"> 
       <annotation> 
        <documentation>Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use "posList" instead.</documentation> 
       </annotation> 
      </element> 
     </choice> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute name="numArc" type="integer" use="optional" fixed="1"> 
     <annotation> 
      <documentation>An arc is an arc string consiting of a single arc, the attribute is fixed to 
"1".</documentation> 
     </annotation> 
    </attribute> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========== global element in "_CurveSegment" substitution group ================ --> 
 <element name="Circle" type="gml:CircleType" substitutionGroup="gml:Arc"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="CircleType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A Circle is an arc whose ends coincide to form a simple closed loop. The "start" and "end" bearing 
are equal and shall be the bearing for the first controlPoint listed. The three control points must be distinct non-co-linear points for 
the Circle to be unambiguously defined. The arc is simply extended past the third control point until the first control point is 
encountered.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:ArcType"/> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========== global element in "_CurveSegment" substitution group ================ --> 
 <element name="ArcStringByBulge" type="gml:ArcStringByBulgeType" substitutionGroup="gml:_CurveSegment"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="ArcStringByBulgeType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> 
    This variant of the arc computes the mid points of the arcs instead of storing the coordinates directly. The control 
point sequence consists of the start and end points of each arc plus the bulge. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 367 
 


 


   </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCurveSegmentType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <choice> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>GML supports two different ways to specify the control points of a curve segment. 
1. A sequence of "pos" (DirectPositionType) or "pointProperty" (PointPropertyType) elements. "pos" elements are control points 
that are only part of this curve segment, "pointProperty" elements contain a point that may be referenced from other geometry 
elements or reference another point defined outside of this curve segment (reuse of existing points). 
2. The "posList" element allows for a compact way to specifiy the coordinates of the control points, if all control points are in the 
same coordinate reference systems and belong to this curve segment only. The number of direct positions in the list must be at 
least two.</documentation> 
      </annotation> 
      <choice minOccurs="2" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
       <element ref="gml:pos"/> 
       <element ref="gml:pointProperty"/> 
       <element ref="gml:pointRep"> 
        <annotation> 
         <documentation>Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use "pointProperty" instead. Included 
for backwards compatibility with GML 3.0.0.</documentation> 
        </annotation> 
       </element> 
      </choice> 
      <element ref="gml:posList"/> 
      <element ref="gml:coordinates"> 
       <annotation> 
        <documentation>Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use "posList" instead.</documentation> 
       </annotation> 
      </element> 
     </choice> 
     <element name="bulge" type="double" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>The bulge controls the offset of each arc's midpoint. The "bulge" is the real number 
multiplier for the normal that determines the offset direction of the midpoint of each arc. The length of the bulge sequence is 
exactly 1 less than the length of the control point array, since a bulge is needed for each pair of adjacent points in the control 
point array. The bulge is not given by a distance, since it is simply a multiplier for the normal. 
The midpoint of the resulting arc is given by: midPoint = ((startPoint + endPoint)/2.0) + bulge*normal</documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
     <element name="normal" type="gml:VectorType" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>The attribute "normal" is a vector normal (perpendicular) to the chord of the arc, the 
line joining the first and last 
point of the arc. In a 2D coordinate system, there are only two possible directions for the normal, and it is often given as a signed 
real, indicating its length, with a positive sign indicating a left turn angle from the chord line, and a negative sign indicating a right 
turn from the chord. In 3D, the normal determines the plane of the arc, along with the start and endPoint of the arc. 
The normal is usually a unit vector, but this is not absolutely necessary. If the normal is a zero vector, the geometric object 
becomes equivalent to the straight line between the two end points. The length of the normal sequence is exactly the same as for 
the bulge sequence, 1 less than the control point sequence length.</documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute name="interpolation" type="gml:CurveInterpolationType" fixed="circularArc2PointWithBulge"> 
     <annotation> 
      <documentation>The attribute "interpolation" specifies the curve interpolation mechanism used for this 
segment. This mechanism 
uses the control points and control parameters to determine the position of this curve segment. For an ArcStringByBulge the 
interpolation is fixed as "circularArc2PointWithBulge".</documentation> 
     </annotation> 
    </attribute> 
    <attribute name="numArc" type="integer" use="optional"> 
     <annotation> 
      <documentation>The number of arcs in the arc string can be explicitly stated in this attribute. The number 
of control points in the arc string must be numArc + 1.</documentation> 
     </annotation> 
    </attribute> 
   </extension> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


368  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========== global element in "_CurveSegment" substitution group ================ --> 
 <element name="ArcByBulge" type="gml:ArcByBulgeType" substitutionGroup="gml:ArcStringByBulge"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="ArcByBulgeType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> 
    An ArcByBulge is an arc string with only one arc unit, i.e. two control points and one bulge. 
   </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:ArcStringByBulgeType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <choice> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>GML supports two different ways to specify the control points of a curve segment. 
1. A sequence of "pos" (DirectPositionType) or "pointProperty" (PointPropertyType) elements. "pos" elements are control points 
that are only part of this curve segment, "pointProperty" elements contain a point that may be referenced from other geometry 
elements or reference another point defined outside of this curve segment (reuse of existing points). 
2. The "posList" element allows for a compact way to specifiy the coordinates of the control points, if all control points are in the 
same coordinate reference systems and belong to this curve segment only. The number of direct positions in the list must be 
two.</documentation> 
      </annotation> 
      <choice minOccurs="2" maxOccurs="2"> 
       <element ref="gml:pos"/> 
       <element ref="gml:pointProperty"/> 
       <element ref="gml:pointRep"> 
        <annotation> 
         <documentation>Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use "pointProperty" instead. Included 
for backwards compatibility with GML 3.0.0.</documentation> 
        </annotation> 
       </element> 
      </choice> 
      <element ref="gml:posList"/> 
      <element ref="gml:coordinates"> 
       <annotation> 
        <documentation>Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use "posList" instead.</documentation> 
       </annotation> 
      </element> 
     </choice> 
     <element name="bulge" type="double"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>The bulge controls the offset of each arc's midpoint. The "bulge" is the real number 
multiplier for the normal that determines the offset direction of the midpoint of each arc. The length of the bulge sequence is 
exactly 1 less than the length of the control point array, since a bulge is needed for each pair of adjacent points in the control 
point array. The bulge is not given by a distance, since it is simply a multiplier for the normal. 
The midpoint of the resulting arc is given by: midPoint = ((startPoint + endPoint)/2.0) + bulge*normal</documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
     <element name="normal" type="gml:VectorType"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>The attribute "normal" is a vector normal (perpendicular) to the chord of the arc, the 
line joining the first and last 
point of the arc. In a 2D coordinate system, there are only two possible directions for the normal, and it is often given as a signed 
real, indicating its length, with a positive sign indicating a left turn angle from the chord line, and a negative sign indicating a right 
turn from the chord. In 3D, the normal determines the plane of the arc, along with the start and endPoint of the arc. 
The normal is usually a unit vector, but this is not absolutely necessary. If the normal is a zero vector, the geometric object 
becomes equivalent to the straight line between the two end points. The length of the normal sequence is exactly the same as for 
the bulge sequence, 1 less than the control point sequence length.</documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute name="numArc" type="integer" use="optional" fixed="1"> 
     <annotation> 
      <documentation>An arc is an arc string consiting of a single arc, the attribute is fixed to 
"1".</documentation> 
     </annotation> 
    </attribute> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 369 
 


 


 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========== global element in "_CurveSegment" substitution group ================ --> 
 <element name="ArcByCenterPoint" type="gml:ArcByCenterPointType" substitutionGroup="gml:_CurveSegment"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="ArcByCenterPointType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> 
    This variant of the arc requires that the points on the arc have to be computed instead of storing the coordinates 
directly. The control point is the center point of the arc plus the radius and the bearing at start and end. This represenation can be 
used only in 2D. 
   </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCurveSegmentType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <choice> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>GML supports two different ways to specify the control points of a curve segment. 
1. A "pos" (DirectPositionType) or "pointProperty" (PointPropertyType) element. The "pos" element contains a center point that is 
only part of this curve segment, a "pointProperty" element contains a point that may be referenced from other geometry elements 
or reference another point defined outside of this curve segment (reuse of existing points). 
2. The "posList" element can be used to specifiy the coordinates of the center point, too. The number of direct positions in the list 
must be one.</documentation> 
      </annotation> 
      <choice> 
       <element ref="gml:pos"/> 
       <element ref="gml:pointProperty"/> 
       <element ref="gml:pointRep"> 
        <annotation> 
         <documentation>Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use "pointProperty" instead. Included 
for backwards compatibility with GML 3.0.0.</documentation> 
        </annotation> 
       </element> 
      </choice> 
      <element ref="gml:posList"/> 
      <element ref="gml:coordinates"> 
       <annotation> 
        <documentation>Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use "posList" instead.</documentation> 
       </annotation> 
      </element> 
     </choice> 
     <element name="radius" type="gml:LengthType"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>The radius of the arc.</documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
     <element name="startAngle" type="gml:AngleType" minOccurs="0"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>The bearing of the arc at the start.</documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
     <element name="endAngle" type="gml:AngleType" minOccurs="0"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>The bearing of the arc at the end.</documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute name="interpolation" type="gml:CurveInterpolationType" fixed="circularArcCenterPointWithRadius"> 
     <annotation> 
      <documentation>The attribute "interpolation" specifies the curve interpolation mechanism used for this 
segment. This mechanism 
uses the control points and control parameters to determine the position of this curve segment. For an ArcByCenterPoint the 
interpolation is fixed as "circularArcCenterPointWithRadius".</documentation> 
     </annotation> 
    </attribute> 
    <attribute name="numArc" type="integer" use="required" fixed="1"> 
     <annotation> 
      <documentation>Since this type describes always a single arc, the attribute is fixed to 
"1".</documentation> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


370  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


     </annotation> 
    </attribute> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========== global element in "_CurveSegment" substitution group ================ --> 
 <element name="CircleByCenterPoint" type="gml:CircleByCenterPointType" substitutionGroup="gml:ArcByCenterPoint"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="CircleByCenterPointType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A CircleByCenterPoint is an ArcByCenterPoint with identical start and end angle to form a full circle. 
Again, this represenation can be used only in 2D.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:ArcByCenterPointType"/> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ================================================================================ --> 
 <element name="OffsetCurve" type="gml:OffsetCurveType" substitutionGroup="gml:_CurveSegment"/> 
 <!-- ================================================================================ --> 
 <complexType name="OffsetCurveType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> An offset curve is a curve at a constant 
   distance from the basis curve. They can be useful as a cheap 
   and simple alternative to constructing curves that are offsets  
   by definition. 
  </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCurveSegmentType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element name="offsetBase" type="gml:CurvePropertyType"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation> offsetBase is a reference to thecurve from which this 
        curve is define as an offset. 
             </documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
     <element name="distance" type="gml:LengthType"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation> distance is the distance at which the 
        offset curve is generated from the basis curve. In 2D systems, positive distances 
        are to be to the left of the basis curve, and the negative distances are to be to the  
        right of the basis curve.  
             </documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
     <element name="refDirection" type="gml:VectorType" minOccurs="0"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation> refDistance is used to define the vector 
       direction of the offset curve from the basis curve. It can 
       be omitted in the 2D case, where the distance can be  
       positive or negative. In that case, distance defines left 
       side (positive distance) or right side (negative distance) 
       with respect to the tangent to the basis curve. 
 
       In 3D the basis curve shall have a well defined tangent  
       direction for every point. The offset curve at any point  
       in 3D, the basis curve shall have a well-defined tangent 
       direction for every point. The offset curve at any point 
       (parameter) on the basis curve c is in the direction 
       -   -   -         -                
       s = v x t  where  v = c.refDirection()   
       and 
       - 
       t = c.tangent() 
                                                    - 
       For the offset direction to be well-defined, v shall not 
       on any point of the curve be in the same, or opposite,  
       direction as 
       -  







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 371 
 


 


       t. 
 
       The default value of the refDirection shall be the local 
       co-ordinate axis vector for elevation, which indicates up for 
       the curve in a geographic sense. 
 
       NOTE! If the refDirection is the positive tangent to the 
       local elevation axis ("points upward"), then the offset 
       vector points to the left of the curve when viewed from 
       above. 
      </documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ====================================================== --> 
 <element name="AffinePlacement" type="gml:AffinePlacementType"/> 
 <!-- ====================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="AffinePlacementType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> A placement takes a standard geometric 
   construction and places it in geographic space. It defines a 
   transformation from a constructive parameter space to the  
   co-ordinate space of the co-ordinate reference system being used.   
   Parameter spaces in formulae in this International Standard are  
   given as (u, v) in 2D and(u, v, w) in 3D. Co-ordinate reference  
   systems positions are given in formulae, in this International  
   Standard, by either (x, y) in 2D, or (x, y, z) in 3D. 
 
   Affine placements are defined by linear transformations from  
   parameter space to the target co-ordiante space. 2-dimensional  
   Cartesian parameter space,(u,v) transforms into 3-dimensional co- 
   ordinate reference systems,(x,y,z) by using an affine  
   transformation,(u,v)->(x,y,z) which is defined : 
 
 x ux vx   x0 
    u    
 y = uy vy   + y0 
    v   
 x uz vz z0 
  
   Then, given this equation, the location element of the  
   AffinePlacement is the direct position (x0, y0, z0), which is the 
   target position of the origin in (u, v). The two reference 
   directions (ux, uy, uz) and (vx, vy, vz) are the target      
   directions of the unit vectors at the origin in (u, v). 
  </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element name="location" type="gml:DirectPositionType"> 
    <annotation> 
     <documentation> The location property gives  
     the target of the parameter space origin. This is the vector   
    (x0, y0, z0) in the formulae above.  
    </documentation> 
    </annotation> 
   </element> 
   <element name="refDirection" type="gml:VectorType" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
    <annotation> 
     <documentation> The attribute refDirection gives the     
target directions for the co-ordinate basis vectors of the   
parameter space. These are the columns of the matrix in the  
formulae given above. The number of directions given shall be  
inDimension. The dimension of the directions shall be  
outDimension.  
    </documentation> 
    </annotation> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


372  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


   </element> 
   <element name="inDimension" type="positiveInteger"> 
    <annotation> 
     <documentation> Dimension of the constructive parameter  
     space. 
    </documentation> 
    </annotation> 
   </element> 
   <element name="outDimension" type="positiveInteger"> 
    <annotation> 
     <documentation> Dimension of the co-ordinate space. 
    </documentation> 
    </annotation> 
   </element> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- = global element in "_CurveSegment" substitution group ========================== --> 
 <element name="Clothoid" type="gml:ClothoidType" substitutionGroup="gml:_CurveSegment"/> 
 <!-- ======================================================================= --> 
 <complexType name="ClothoidType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> A clothoid, or Cornu's spiral, is plane 
   curve whose curvature is a fixed function of its length. 
   In suitably chosen co-ordinates it is given by Fresnel's 
   integrals. 
 
    x(t) = 0-integral-t cos(AT*T/2)dT     
     
    y(t) = 0-integral-t sin(AT*T/2)dT 
    
   This geometry is mainly used as a transition curve between 
   curves of type straight line to circular arc or circular arc 
   to circular arc. With this curve type it is possible to  
   achieve a C2-continous transition between the above mentioned 
   curve types. One formula for the Clothoid is A*A = R*t where 
   A is constant, R is the varying radius of curvature along the 
   the curve and t is the length along and given in the Fresnel  
   integrals.      
  </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCurveSegmentType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element name="refLocation"> 
      <complexType> 
       <sequence> 
        <element ref="gml:AffinePlacement"> 
         <annotation> 
          <documentation> The "refLocation" is an affine mapping  
          that places  the curve defined by the Fresnel Integrals   
          into the co-ordinate reference system of this object. 
         </documentation> 
         </annotation> 
        </element> 
       </sequence> 
      </complexType> 
     </element> 
     <element name="scaleFactor" type="decimal"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>The element gives the value for the 
       constant in the Fresnel's integrals. 
      </documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
     <element name="startParameter" type="double"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>The startParameter is the arc length 
       distance from the inflection point that will be the start 
       point for this curve segment. This shall be lower limit 
       used in the Fresnel integral and is the value of the 
       constructive parameter of this curve segment at its start 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 373 
 


 


       point. The startParameter can either be positive or 
       negative.  
       NOTE! If 0.0 (zero), lies between the startParameter and 
       the endParameter of the clothoid, then the curve goes 
       through the clothoid's inflection point, and the direction 
       of its radius of curvature, given by the second 
       derivative vector, changes sides with respect to the 
       tangent vector. The term length distance for the 
      </documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
     <element name="endParameter" type="double"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>The endParameter is the arc length 
       distance from the inflection point that will be the end 
       point for this curve segment. This shall be upper limit 
       used in the Fresnel integral and is the value of the 
       constructive parameter of this curve segment at its 
       start point. The startParameter can either be positive 
       or negative. 
      </documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- = global element in "_CurveSegment" substitution group = --> 
 <element name="GeodesicString" type="gml:GeodesicStringType" substitutionGroup="gml:_CurveSegment"/> 
 <!-- ======================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="GeodesicStringType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> A GeodesicString consists of sequence of 
   geodesic segments. The type essentially combines a sequence of 
   Geodesic into a single object. 
   The GeodesicString is computed from two or more positions and an 
   interpolation using geodesics defined from the geoid (or  
   ellipsoid) of the co-ordinate reference system being used. 
  </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCurveSegmentType"> 
    <choice> 
     <element ref="gml:posList"/> 
     <group ref="gml:geometricPositionGroup" minOccurs="2" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
    </choice> 
    <attribute name="interpolation" type="gml:CurveInterpolationType" fixed="geodesic"> 
     <annotation> 
      <documentation>The attribute "interpolation" specifies the 
     curve interpolation mechanism used for this segment. This 
     mechanism uses the control points and control parameters to 
     determine the position of this curve segment. For an  
     GeodesicString the interpolation is fixed as "geodesic". 
    </documentation> 
     </annotation> 
    </attribute> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- = global element in "_CurveSegment" substitution group = --> 
 <element name="Geodesic" type="gml:GeodesicType" substitutionGroup="gml:GeodesicString"/> 
 <!-- ======================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="GeodesicType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> A Geodesic consists of two distinct 
   positions joined by a geodesic curve. The control points of 
   a Geodesic shall lie on the geodesic between its start 
   point and end points. Between these two points, a geodesic 
   curve defined from ellipsoid or geoid model used by the 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


374  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


   co-ordinate reference systems may be used to interpolate 
   other positions. Any other point in the controlPoint array 
   must fall on this geodesic. 
  </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:GeodesicStringType"/> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========== global element in "_CurveSegment" substitution group ================ --> 
 <element name="CubicSpline" type="gml:CubicSplineType" substitutionGroup="gml:_CurveSegment"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="CubicSplineType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> 
    Cubic splines are similar to line strings in that they are a sequence of segments each with its own defining 
function. A cubic spline uses the control points and a set of derivative parameters to define a piecewise 3rd degree polynomial 
interpolation. Unlike line-strings, the parameterization by arc length is not necessarily still a polynomial.  
    The function describing the curve must be C2, that is, have a continuous 1st and 2nd derivative at all points, and 
pass through the controlPoints in the order given. Between the control points, the curve segment is defined by a cubic polynomial. 
At each control point, the polynomial changes in such a manner that the 1st and 2nd derivative vectors are the same from either 
side. The control parameters record must contain vectorAtStart, and vectorAtEnd which are the unit tangent vectors at 
controlPoint[1] and controlPoint[n] where n = controlPoint.count.  
    Note: only the direction of the vectors is relevant, not their length. 
   </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCurveSegmentType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <choice> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>GML supports two different ways to specify the control points of a curve segment. 
1. A sequence of "pos" (DirectPositionType) or "pointProperty" (PointPropertyType) elements. "pos" elements are control points 
that are only part of this curve segment, "pointProperty" elements contain a point that may be referenced from other geometry 
elements or reference another point defined outside of this curve segment (reuse of existing points). 
2. The "posList" element allows for a compact way to specifiy the coordinates of the control points, if all control points are in the 
same coordinate reference systems and belong to this curve segment only. The number of direct positions in the list must be at 
least three.</documentation> 
      </annotation> 
      <choice minOccurs="2" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
       <element ref="gml:pos"/> 
       <element ref="gml:pointProperty"/> 
       <element ref="gml:pointRep"> 
        <annotation> 
         <documentation>Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use "pointProperty" instead. Included 
for backwards compatibility with GML 3.0.0.</documentation> 
        </annotation> 
       </element> 
      </choice> 
      <element ref="gml:posList"/> 
      <element ref="gml:coordinates"> 
       <annotation> 
        <documentation>Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use "posList" instead.</documentation> 
       </annotation> 
      </element> 
     </choice> 
     <element name="vectorAtStart" type="gml:VectorType"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>"vectorAtStart" is the unit tangent vector at the start point of the 
spline.</documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
     <element name="vectorAtEnd" type="gml:VectorType"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>"vectorAtEnd" is the unit tangent vector at the end point of the 
spline.</documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute name="interpolation" type="gml:CurveInterpolationType" fixed="cubicSpline"> 
     <annotation> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 375 
 


 


      <documentation>The attribute "interpolation" specifies the curve interpolation mechanism used for this 
segment. This mechanism 
uses the control points and control parameters to determine the position of this curve segment. For a CubicSpline the 
interpolation is fixed as "cubicSpline".</documentation> 
     </annotation> 
    </attribute> 
    <attribute name="degree" type="integer" fixed="3"> 
     <annotation> 
      <documentation>The degree for a cubic spline is "3".</documentation> 
     </annotation> 
    </attribute> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="KnotType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A knot is a breakpoint on a piecewise spline curve.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element name="value" type="double"> 
    <annotation> 
     <documentation>The property "value" is the value of the parameter at the knot of the spline. The sequence of 
knots shall be a non-decreasing sequence. That is, each knot's value in the sequence shall be equal to or greater than the 
previous knot's value. The use of equal consecutive knots is normally handled using the multiplicity.</documentation> 
    </annotation> 
   </element> 
   <element name="multiplicity" type="nonNegativeInteger"> 
    <annotation> 
     <documentation>The property "multiplicity" is the multiplicity of this knot used in the definition of the spline 
(with the same weight).</documentation> 
    </annotation> 
   </element> 
   <element name="weight" type="double"> 
    <annotation> 
     <documentation>The property "weight" is the value of the averaging weight used for this knot of the 
spline.</documentation> 
    </annotation> 
   </element> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="KnotPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> 
           Encapsulates a knot to use it in a geometric type. 
   </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element name="Knot" type="gml:KnotType"/> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========== global element in "_CurveSegment" substitution group ================ --> 
 <element name="BSpline" type="gml:BSplineType" substitutionGroup="gml:_CurveSegment"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="BSplineType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A B-Spline is a piecewise parametric polynomial or rational curve described in terms of control 
points and basis functions. Knots are breakpoints on the curve that connect its pieces. They are given as a non-decreasing 
sequence of real numbers. If the weights in the knots are equal then it is a polynomial spline. The degree is the algebraic degree 
of the basis functions. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCurveSegmentType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <choice> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>GML supports two different ways to specify the control points of a curve segment. 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


376  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


1. A sequence of "pos" (DirectPositionType) or "pointProperty" (PointPropertyType) elements. "pos" elements are control points 
that are only part of this curve segment, "pointProperty" elements contain a point that may be referenced from other geometry 
elements or reference another point defined outside of this curve segment (reuse of existing points). 
2. The "posList" element allows for a compact way to specifiy the coordinates of the control points, if all control points are in the 
same coordinate reference systems and belong to this curve segment only.</documentation> 
      </annotation> 
      <choice minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
       <element ref="gml:pos"/> 
       <element ref="gml:pointProperty"/> 
       <element ref="gml:pointRep"> 
        <annotation> 
         <documentation>Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use "pointProperty" instead. Included 
for backwards compatibility with GML 3.0.0.</documentation> 
        </annotation> 
       </element> 
      </choice> 
      <element ref="gml:posList"/> 
      <element ref="gml:coordinates"> 
       <annotation> 
        <documentation>Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use "posList" instead.</documentation> 
       </annotation> 
      </element> 
     </choice> 
     <element name="degree" type="nonNegativeInteger"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>The attribute "degree" shall be the degree of the polynomial used for interpolation in 
this spline.</documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
     <element name="knot" type="gml:KnotPropertyType" minOccurs="2" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>The property "knot" shall be the sequence of distinct knots used to define the spline 
basis functions.</documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute name="interpolation" type="gml:CurveInterpolationType" default="polynomialSpline"> 
     <annotation> 
      <documentation>The attribute "interpolation" specifies the curve interpolation mechanism used for this 
segment. This mechanism 
uses the control points and control parameters to determine the position of this curve segment. For a BSpline the interpolation 
can be either "polynomialSpline" or "rationalSpline", default is "polynomialSpline".</documentation> 
     </annotation> 
    </attribute> 
    <attribute name="isPolynomial" type="boolean" use="optional"> 
     <annotation> 
      <documentation>The attribute isPolynomial is set to true if this is a polynomial 
spline.</documentation> 
     </annotation> 
    </attribute> 
    <attribute name="knotType" type="gml:KnotTypesType" use="optional"> 
     <annotation> 
      <documentation>The attribute "knotType" gives the type of knot distribution used in defining this spline. 
This is for information only 
and is set according to the different construction-functions.</documentation> 
     </annotation> 
    </attribute> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========== global element in "_CurveSegment" substitution group ================ --> 
 <element name="Bezier" type="gml:BezierType" substitutionGroup="gml:BSpline"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="BezierType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Bezier curves are polynomial splines that use Bezier or Bernstein polynomials for interpolation 
purposes. It is a special case of the B-Spline curve with two knots.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:BSplineType"> 
    <sequence> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 377 
 


 


     <choice> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>GML supports two different ways to specify the control points of a curve segment. 
1. A sequence of "pos" (DirectPositionType) or "pointProperty" (PointPropertyType) elements. "pos" elements are control points 
that are only part of this curve segment, "pointProperty" elements contain a point that may be referenced from other geometry 
elements or reference another point defined outside of this curve segment (reuse of existing points). 
2. The "posList" element allows for a compact way to specifiy the coordinates of the control points, if all control points are in the 
same coordinate reference systems and belong to this curve segment only.</documentation> 
      </annotation> 
      <choice minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
       <element ref="gml:pos"/> 
       <element ref="gml:pointProperty"/> 
       <element ref="gml:pointRep"> 
        <annotation> 
         <documentation>Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use "pointProperty" instead. Included 
for backwards compatibility with GML 3.0.0.</documentation> 
        </annotation> 
       </element> 
      </choice> 
      <element ref="gml:posList"/> 
      <element ref="gml:coordinates"> 
       <annotation> 
        <documentation>Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0. Use "posList" instead.</documentation> 
       </annotation> 
      </element> 
     </choice> 
     <element name="degree" type="nonNegativeInteger"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>The attribute "degree" shall be the degree of the polynomial used for interpolation in 
this spline.</documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
     <element name="knot" type="gml:KnotPropertyType" minOccurs="2" maxOccurs="2"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>The property "knot" shall be the sequence of distinct knots used to define the spline 
basis functions.</documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute name="interpolation" type="gml:CurveInterpolationType" fixed="polynomialSpline"> 
     <annotation> 
      <documentation>The attribute "interpolation" specifies the curve interpolation mechanism used for this 
segment. This mechanism 
uses the control points and control parameters to determine the position of this curve segment. For a Bezier the interpolation is 
fixed as "polynomialSpline".</documentation> 
     </annotation> 
    </attribute> 
    <attribute name="isPolynomial" type="boolean" fixed="true"> 
     <annotation> 
      <documentation>The attribute isPolynomial is set to true as this is a polynomial 
spline.</documentation> 
     </annotation> 
    </attribute> 
    <attribute name="knotType" type="gml:KnotTypesType" use="prohibited"> 
     <annotation> 
      <documentation>The property "knotType" is not relevant for Bezier curve segments.</documentation> 
     </annotation> 
    </attribute> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="Surface" type="gml:SurfaceType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Surface"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="SurfaceType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> 
    A Surface is a 2-dimensional primitive and is composed of one or more surface patches. The surface patches are 
connected to one another. 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


378  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


    The orientation of the surface is positive ("up"). The orientation of a surface chooses an "up" direction through the 
choice of the upward normal, which, if the surface is not a cycle, is the side of the surface from which the exterior boundary 
appears counterclockwise. Reversal of the surface orientation reverses the curve orientation of each boundary component, and 
interchanges the conceptual "up" and "down" direction of the surface. If the surface is the boundary of a solid, the "up" direction is 
usually outward. For closed surfaces, which have no boundary, the up direction is that of the surface patches, which must be 
consistent with one another. Its included surface patches describe the interior structure of the Surface. 
   </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractSurfaceType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:patches"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>This element encapsulates the patches of the surface.</documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="baseSurface" type="gml:SurfacePropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <appinfo> 
    <sch:pattern> 
     <sch:rule context="gml:baseSurface"> 
      <sch:extends rule="hrefOrContent"/> 
     </sch:rule> 
    </sch:pattern> 
   </appinfo> 
   <documentation>This property element either references a surface via the XLink-attributes or contains the surface 
element. A surface element is any element which is substitutable for "_Surface".</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="OrientableSurface" type="gml:OrientableSurfaceType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Surface"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="OrientableSurfaceType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> 
    OrientableSurface consists of a surface and an orientation. If the orientation is "+", then the OrientableSurface is 
identical to the baseSurface. If the orientation is "-", then the OrientableSurface is a reference to a Surface with an up-normal that 
reverses the direction for this OrientableSurface, the sense of "the top of the surface". 
   </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractSurfaceType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:baseSurface"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>References or contains the base surface (positive orientation).</documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute name="orientation" type="gml:SignType" default="+"> 
     <annotation> 
      <documentation>If the orientation is "+", then the OrientableSurface is identical to the baseSurface. If the 
orientation is "-", then the OrientableSurface is a reference to a Surface with an up-normal that reverses the direction for this 
OrientableSurface, the sense of "the top of the surface". "+" is the default value.</documentation> 
     </annotation> 
    </attribute> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <!-- surface patches (2-dimensional) --> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="_SurfacePatch" type="gml:AbstractSurfacePatchType" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 379 
 


 


   <documentation>The "_SurfacePatch" element is the abstract head of the substituition group for all surface pach 
elements describing a continuous portion of a surface.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="AbstractSurfacePatchType" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> 
    A surface patch defines a homogenuous portion of a surface. 
   </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="patches" type="gml:SurfacePatchArrayPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>This property element contains a list of surface patches. The order of the elements is significant and 
shall be preserved when processing the array.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="SurfacePatchArrayPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A container for an array of surface patches.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:_SurfacePatch" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="PolygonPatch" type="gml:PolygonPatchType" substitutionGroup="gml:_SurfacePatch"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="PolygonPatchType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> 
    A PolygonPatch is a surface patch that is defined by a set of boundary curves and an underlying surface to which 
these curves adhere. The curves are coplanar and the polygon uses planar interpolation in its interior. Implements GM_Polygon 
of ISO 19107.  
   </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractSurfacePatchType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:exterior" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:interior" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute name="interpolation" type="gml:SurfaceInterpolationType" fixed="planar"> 
     <annotation> 
      <documentation>The attribute "interpolation" specifies the interpolation mechanism used for this surface 
patch. Currently only planar surface patches are defined in GML 3, the attribute is fixed to "planar", i.e. the interpolation method 
shall return points on a single plane. The boundary of the patch shall be contained within that plane.</documentation> 
     </annotation> 
    </attribute> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="Triangle" type="gml:TriangleType" substitutionGroup="gml:_SurfacePatch"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="TriangleType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Represents a triangle as a surface with an outer boundary consisting of a linear ring. Note that this 
is a polygon (subtype) with no inner boundaries. The number of points in the linear ring must be four.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractSurfacePatchType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:exterior"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


380  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


        Constraint: The Ring shall be a LinearRing and must form a triangle, the first and the last position 
must be co-incident. 
       </documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute name="interpolation" type="gml:SurfaceInterpolationType" fixed="planar"> 
     <annotation> 
      <documentation>The attribute "interpolation" specifies the interpolation mechanism used for this surface 
patch. Currently only planar surface patches are defined in GML 3, the attribute is fixed to "planar", i.e. the interpolation method 
shall return points on a single plane. The boundary of the patch shall be contained within that plane.</documentation> 
     </annotation> 
    </attribute> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="Rectangle" type="gml:RectangleType" substitutionGroup="gml:_SurfacePatch"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="RectangleType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Represents a rectangle as a surface with an outer boundary consisting of a linear ring. Note that this 
is a polygon (subtype) with no inner boundaries. The number of points in the linear ring must be five.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractSurfacePatchType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:exterior"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation> 
        Constraint: The Ring shall be a LinearRing and must form a rectangle; the first and the last 
position must be co-incident. 
       </documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute name="interpolation" type="gml:SurfaceInterpolationType" fixed="planar"> 
     <annotation> 
      <documentation>The attribute "interpolation" specifies the interpolation mechanism used for this surface 
patch. Currently only planar surface patches are defined in GML 3, the attribute is fixed to "planar", i.e. the interpolation method 
shall return points on a single plane. The boundary of the patch shall be contained within that plane.</documentation> 
     </annotation> 
    </attribute> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="curveMember" type="gml:CurvePropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>This property element either references a curve via the XLink-attributes or contains the curve 
element. A curve element is any element which is substitutable for "_Curve".</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="Ring" type="gml:RingType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Ring"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="RingType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A Ring is used to represent a single connected component of a surface boundary. It consists of a 
sequence of curves connected in a cycle (an object whose boundary is empty). 
A Ring is structurally similar to a composite curve in that the endPoint of each curve in the sequence is the startPoint of the next 
curve in the Sequence. Since the sequence is circular, there is no exception to this rule. Each ring, like all boundaries, is a cycle 
and each ring is simple. 
NOTE: Even though each Ring is simple, the boundary need not be simple. The easiest case of this is where one of the interior 
rings of a surface is tangent to its exterior ring.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractRingType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:curveMember" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
      <annotation> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 381 
 


 


       <documentation>This element references or contains one curve in the composite curve. The curves 
are contiguous, the collection of curves is ordered. 
NOTE: This definition allows for a nested structure, i.e. a CompositeCurve may use, for example, another CompositeCurve as a 
curve member.</documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="RingPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> 
           Encapsulates a ring to represent properties in features or geometry collections. 
   </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:Ring"/> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <group name="PointGrid"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> Reference points which are organised 
   into sequences or grids(sequences of equal length sequences). 
  </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element name="row" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
    <complexType> 
     <sequence> 
      <group ref="gml:geometricPositionListGroup"/> 
     </sequence> 
    </complexType> 
   </element> 
  </sequence> 
 </group> 
 <!-- ====================================================== --> 
 <element name="_ParametricCurveSurface" type="gml:AbstractParametricCurveSurfaceType" abstract="true" 
substitutionGroup="gml:_SurfacePatch"/> 
 <!-- ====================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="AbstractParametricCurveSurfaceType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>   
   </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractSurfacePatchType"/> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ======================================================== --> 
 <element name="_GriddedSurface" type="gml:AbstractGriddedSurfaceType" abstract="true" 
substitutionGroup="gml:_ParametricCurveSurface"/> 
 <!-- ======================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="AbstractGriddedSurfaceType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> A gridded surface is a parametric curve 
   surface derived from a rectangular grid in the parameter 
   space. The rows from this grid are control points for 
   horizontal surface curves; the columns are control points 
   for vertical surface curves. The working assumption is that 
   for a pair of parametric co-ordinates (s, t) that the 
   horizontal curves for each integer offset are calculated 
   and evaluated at "s". The defines a sequence of control 
   points: 
    
   cn(s) : s  1 .....columns  
 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


382  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


   From this sequence a vertical curve is calculated for "s", 
   and evaluated at "t". In most cases, the order of 
   calculation (horizontal-vertical vs. vertical-horizontal) 
   does not make a difference. Where it does, the horizontal-    
   vertical order shall be the one used. 
 
   Logically, any pair of curve interpolation types can lead 
   to a subtype of GriddedSurface. The following clauses 
   define some most commonly encountered surfaces that can 
   be represented in this manner.  
  </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractParametricCurveSurfaceType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <group ref="gml:PointGrid"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation> This is the double indexed sequence 
       of control points, given in row major form.  
       NOTE! There in no assumption made about the shape 
       of the grid.  
       For example, the positions need not effect a "21/2D" 
       surface, consecutive points may be equal in any or all 
       of the ordinates. Further, the curves in either or both 
       directions may close.     
      </documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </group> 
     <element name="rows" type="integer" minOccurs="0"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation> The attribute rows gives the number 
         of rows in the parameter grid. 
       </documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
     <element name="columns" type="integer" minOccurs="0"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation> The attribute columns gives the number 
        of columns in the parameter grid. 
       </documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ======================================================== --> 
 <element name="Cone" type="gml:ConeType" substitutionGroup="gml:_GriddedSurface"/> 
 <!-- ======================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="ConeType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> A cone is a gridded surface given as a 
   family of conic sections whose control points vary linearly. 
   NOTE! A 5-point ellipse with all defining positions identical 
   is a point. Thus, a truncated elliptical cone can be given as a 
   2x5 set of control points 
   ((P1, P1, P1, P1, P1), (P2, P3, P4, P5, P6)). P1 is the apex  
   of the cone. P2, P3,P4, P5 and P6 are any five distinct points 
   around the base ellipse of the cone. If the horizontal curves 
   are circles as opposed to ellipses, the a circular cone can 
   be constructed using ((P1, P1, P1),(P2, P3, P4)). The apex most      
   not coinside with the other plane.  
  </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGriddedSurfaceType"> 
    <attribute name="horizontalCurveType" type="gml:CurveInterpolationType" fixed="circularArc3Points"/> 
    <attribute name="verticalCurveType" type="gml:CurveInterpolationType" fixed="linear"/> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 383 
 


 


 <!-- ======================================================== --> 
 <element name="Cylinder" type="gml:CylinderType" substitutionGroup="gml:_GriddedSurface"/> 
 <!-- ======================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="CylinderType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> A cylinder is a gridded surface given as a 
   family of circles whose positions vary along a set of parallel 
   lines, keeping the cross sectional horizontal curves of a 
   constant shape. 
   NOTE! Given the same working assumptions as in the previous 
   note, a Cylinder can be given by two circles, giving us the 
   control points of the form ((P1, P2, P3),(P4, P5, P6)).  
  </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGriddedSurfaceType"> 
    <attribute name="horizontalCurveType" type="gml:CurveInterpolationType" fixed="circularArc3Points"/> 
    <attribute name="verticalCurveType" type="gml:CurveInterpolationType" fixed="linear"/> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ======================================================== --> 
 <element name="Sphere" type="gml:SphereType" substitutionGroup="gml:_GriddedSurface"/> 
 <!-- ======================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="SphereType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> A sphere is a gridded surface given as a 
   family of circles whose positions vary linearly along the 
   axis of the sphere, and whise radius varies in proportions to 
   the cosine function of the central angle. The horizontal  
   circles resemble lines of constant latitude, and the vertical 
   arcs resemble lines of constant longitude.  
   NOTE! If the control points are sorted in terms of increasing 
   longitude, and increasing latitude, the upNormal of a sphere 
   is the outward normal. 
   EXAMPLE If we take a gridded set of latitudes and longitudes 
   in degrees,(u,v) such as 
 
 (-90,-180)  (-90,-90)  (-90,0)  (-90,  90) (-90, 180)  
 (-45,-180)  (-45,-90)  (-45,0)  (-45,  90) (-45, 180)  
 (  0,-180)  (  0,-90)  (  0,0)  (  0,  90) (  0, 180) 
 ( 45,-180)  ( 45,-90)  ( 45,0)  ( 45, -90) ( 45, 180) 
 ( 90,-180)  ( 90,-90)  ( 90,0)  ( 90, -90) ( 90, 180) 
    
   And map these points to 3D using the usual equations (where R 
   is the radius of the required sphere). 
 
    z = R sin u 
    x = (R cos u)(sin v) 
    y = (R cos u)(cos v) 
 
   We have a sphere of Radius R, centred at (0,0), as a gridded 
   surface. Notice that the entire first row and the entire last 
   row of the control points map to a single point in each 3D 
   Euclidean space, North and South poles respectively, and that 
   each horizontal curve closes back on itself forming a  
   geometric cycle. This gives us a metrically bounded (of finite 
   size), topologically unbounded (not having a boundary, a 
   cycle) surface.  
  </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGriddedSurfaceType"> 
    <attribute name="horizontalCurveType" type="gml:CurveInterpolationType" fixed="circularArc3Points"/> 
    <attribute name="verticalCurveType" type="gml:CurveInterpolationType" fixed="circularArc3Points"/> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ======================================================== --> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


384  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 <element name="PolyhedralSurface" type="gml:PolyhedralSurfaceType" substitutionGroup="gml:Surface"/> 
 <!-- ======================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="PolyhedralSurfaceType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> A polyhedral surface is a surface composed 
   of polygon surfaces connected along their common boundary  
   curves. This differs from the surface type only in the 
   restriction on the types of surface patches acceptable. 
  </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:SurfaceType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <group ref="gml:StandardObjectProperties"/> 
     <element ref="gml:polygonPatches"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation> This property encapsulates the patches of  
      the polyhedral surface. 
     </documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
    </sequence> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ======================================================== --> 
 <element name="polygonPatches" type="gml:PolygonPatchArrayPropertyType" substitutionGroup="gml:patches"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> This property element contains a list of 
   polygon patches. The order of the patches is significant and  
   shall be preserved when processing the list.  
  </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- ======================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="PolygonPatchArrayPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>This type defines a container for an array of  
   polygon patches. 
  </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:SurfacePatchArrayPropertyType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:PolygonPatch" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ======================================================== --> 
 <element name="trianglePatches" type="gml:TrianglePatchArrayPropertyType" substitutionGroup="gml:patches"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> This property element contains a list of 
   triangle patches. The order of the patches is significant and  
   shall be preserved when processing the list. 
  </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- ======================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="TrianglePatchArrayPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> This type defines a container for an array of  
     triangle patches. 
   </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:SurfacePatchArrayPropertyType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:Triangle" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </restriction> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 385 
 


 


  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ======================================================== --> 
 <element name="TriangulatedSurface" type="gml:TriangulatedSurfaceType" substitutionGroup="gml:Surface"/> 
 <!-- ======================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="TriangulatedSurfaceType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> A triangulated surface is a polyhedral  
   surface that is composed only of triangles. There is no 
   restriction on how the triangulation is derived.  
  </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:SurfaceType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <group ref="gml:StandardObjectProperties"/> 
     <element ref="gml:trianglePatches"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation> This property encapsulates the patches of  
      the triangulated surface. 
     </documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
    </sequence> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ======================================================== --> 
 <element name="Tin" type="gml:TinType" substitutionGroup="gml:TriangulatedSurface"/> 
 <!-- ======================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="TinType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> A tin is a triangulated surface that uses 
   the Delauny algorithm or a similar algorithm complemented with 
   consideration of breaklines, stoplines, and maximum length of  
   triangle sides. These networks satisfy the Delauny's criterion 
   away from the modifications: Fore each triangle in the  
   network, the circle passing through its vertices does not 
   contain, in its interior, the vertex of any other triangle. 
  </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:TriangulatedSurfaceType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element name="stopLines" type="gml:LineStringSegmentArrayPropertyType" minOccurs="0" 
maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation> Stoplines are lines where the local 
       continuity or regularity of the surface is questionable. 
       In the area of these pathologies, triangles intersecting 
       a stopline shall be removed from the tin surface, leaving 
       holes in the surface. If coincidence occurs on surface 
       boundary triangles, the result shall be a change of the  
       surface boundary. Stoplines contains all these 
       pathological segments as a set of line strings. 
      </documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
     <element name="breakLines" type="gml:LineStringSegmentArrayPropertyType" minOccurs="0" 
maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation> Breaklines are lines of a critical 
       nature to the shape of the surface, representing local 
       ridges, or depressions (such as drainage lines) in the 
       surface. As such their constituent segments must be 
       included in the tin eve if doing so 
       violates the Delauny criterion. Break lines contains these 
       critical segments as a set of line strings. 
      </documentation> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


386  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


      </annotation> 
     </element> 
     <element name="maxLength" type="gml:LengthType"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation> Areas of the surface where data is not  
       sufficiently dense to assure reasonable calculation shall be     
       removed by adding a retention criterion for triangles based  
       on the length of their sides. For many triangle sides   
       exceeding maximum length, the adjacent triangles to that  
       triangle side shall be removed from the surface. 
      </documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
     <element name="controlPoint"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation> The corners of the triangles in the TIN  
  are often referred to as pots. ControlPoint shall contain a  
  set of the GM_Position used as posts for this TIN. Since each   
  TIN contains triangles, there must be at least 3 posts. The  
       order in which these points are given does not affect the  
       surface that is represented. Application schemas may add  
       information based on ordering of control points to facilitate  
       the reconstruction of the TIN from the control points. 
      </documentation> 
      </annotation> 
      <complexType> 
       <choice> 
        <element ref="gml:posList"/> 
        <group ref="gml:geometricPositionGroup" minOccurs="3" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
       </choice> 
      </complexType> 
     </element> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <complexType name="LineStringSegmentArrayPropertyType"> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:LineStringSegment" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <!-- primitive geometry objects (3-dimensional) --> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="_Solid" type="gml:AbstractSolidType" abstract="true" substitutionGroup="gml:_GeometricPrimitive"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>The "_Solid" element is the abstract head of the substituition group for all (continuous) solid 
elements.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="AbstractSolidType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> 
    An abstraction of a solid to support the different levels of complexity. A solid is always contiguous. 
   </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGeometricPrimitiveType"/> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="solidProperty" type="gml:SolidPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <appinfo> 
    <sch:pattern> 
     <sch:rule context="gml:solidProperty"> 
      <sch:extends rule="hrefOrContent"/> 
     </sch:rule> 
    </sch:pattern> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 387 
 


 


   </appinfo> 
   <documentation>This property element either references a solid via the XLink-attributes or contains the solid 
element. solidProperty is the predefined property which can be used by GML Application Schemas whenever a GML Feature has 
a property with a value that is substitutable for _Solid.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="SolidPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A property that has a solid as its value domain can either be an appropriate geometry element 
encapsulated in an element of this type or an XLink reference to a remote geometry element (where remote includes geometry 
elements located elsewhere in the same document). Either the reference or the contained element must be given, but neither 
both nor none.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:_Solid" minOccurs="0"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"> 
   <annotation> 
    <documentation>This attribute group includes the XLink attributes (see xlinks.xsd). XLink is used in GML to 
reference remote resources (including those elsewhere in the same document). A simple link element can be constructed by 
including a specific set of XLink attributes. The XML Linking Language (XLink) is currently a Proposed Recommendation of the 
World Wide Web Consortium. XLink allows elements to be inserted into XML documents so as to create sophisticated links 
between resources; such links can be used to reference remote properties. 
A simple link element can be used to implement pointer functionality, and this functionality has been built into various GML 3 
elements by including the gml:AssociationAttributeGroup. 
    </documentation> 
   </annotation> 
  </attributeGroup> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="solidArrayProperty" type="gml:SolidArrayPropertyType"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="SolidArrayPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A container for an array of solids. The elements are always contained in the array property, 
referencing geometry elements or arrays of geometry elements is not supported.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:_Solid" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="Solid" type="gml:SolidType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Solid"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="SolidType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A solid is the basis for 3-dimensional geometry. The extent of a solid is defined by the boundary 
surfaces (shells). A shell is represented by a composite surface, where every  shell is used to represent a single connected 
component of the boundary of a solid. It consists of a composite surface (a list of orientable surfaces) connected in a topological 
cycle (an object whose boundary is empty). Unlike a Ring, a Shell's elements have no natural sort order. Like Rings, Shells are 
simple.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractSolidType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element name="exterior" type="gml:SurfacePropertyType" minOccurs="0"> 
      <annotation> 
       <appinfo> 
        <sch:pattern> 
         <sch:rule context="gml:exterior"> 
          <sch:extends rule="hrefOrContent"/> 
         </sch:rule> 
        </sch:pattern> 
       </appinfo> 
       <documentation>Boundaries of solids are similar to surface boundaries. In normal 3-dimensional 
Euclidean space, one (composite) surface is distinguished as the exterior. In the more general case, this is not always 
possible.</documentation> 
      </annotation> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


388  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


     </element> 
     <element name="interior" type="gml:SurfacePropertyType" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
      <annotation> 
       <appinfo> 
        <sch:pattern> 
         <sch:rule context="gml:interior"> 
          <sch:extends rule="hrefOrContent"/> 
         </sch:rule> 
        </sch:pattern> 
       </appinfo> 
       <documentation>Boundaries of solids are similar to surface boundaries.</documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <!-- predefined simple types (enumerations, simple typed arrays) --> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <simpleType name="CurveInterpolationType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>CurveInterpolationType is a list of codes that may be used to identify the interpolation mechanisms 
specified by an 
application schema.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <restriction base="string"> 
   <enumeration value="linear"/> 
   <enumeration value="geodesic"/> 
   <enumeration value="circularArc3Points"/> 
   <enumeration value="circularArc2PointWithBulge"/> 
   <enumeration value="circularArcCenterPointWithRadius"/> 
   <enumeration value="elliptical"/> 
   <enumeration value="clothoid"/> 
   <enumeration value="conic"/> 
   <enumeration value="polynomialSpline"/> 
   <enumeration value="cubicSpline"/> 
   <enumeration value="rationalSpline"/> 
  </restriction> 
 </simpleType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <simpleType name="SurfaceInterpolationType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>SurfaceInterpolationType is a list of codes that may be used to identify the interpolation 
mechanisms specified by an 
application schema.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <restriction base="string"> 
   <enumeration value="none"/> 
   <enumeration value="planar"/> 
   <enumeration value="spherical"/> 
   <enumeration value="elliptical"/> 
   <enumeration value="conic"/> 
   <enumeration value="tin"/> 
   <enumeration value="parametricCurve"/> 
   <enumeration value="polynomialSpline"/> 
   <enumeration value="rationalSpline"/> 
   <enumeration value="triangulatedSpline"/> 
  </restriction> 
 </simpleType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <simpleType name="KnotTypesType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Defines allowed values for the knots` type. Uniform knots implies that all knots are of multiplicity 1 
and they differ by a positive constant from the preceding knot. Knots are quasi-uniform iff they are of multiplicity (degree + 1) at 
the ends, of multiplicity 1 elsewhere, and they differ by a positive constant from the preceding knot.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <restriction base="string"> 
   <enumeration value="uniform"/> 
   <enumeration value="quasiUniform"/> 
   <enumeration value="piecewiseBezier"/> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 389 
 


 


  </restriction> 
 </simpleType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
</schema> 


C.18 gml.xsd 


<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
<xsd:schema targetNamespace="http://www.opengis.net/gml" xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink" 
xmlns:gml="http://www.opengis.net/gml" xmlns:sch="http://www.ascc.net/xml/schematron" 
xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" xmlns:xsd="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" elementFormDefault="qualified" 
attributeFormDefault="unqualified" version="3.1.0"> 
 <xsd:annotation> 
  <xsd:appinfo source="urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-xsd:gml:v3.1.0">gml.xsd</xsd:appinfo> 
  <xsd:documentation> 
       Copyright (c) 2002-2003 OGC, All Rights Reserved. 
   Top level GML schema 
  </xsd:documentation> 
 </xsd:annotation> 
 <!-- ====================================================================== --> 
 <xsd:include schemaLocation="dynamicFeature.xsd"/> 
 <xsd:include schemaLocation="topology.xsd"/> 
 <xsd:include schemaLocation="coverage.xsd"/> 
 <xsd:include schemaLocation="coordinateReferenceSystems.xsd"/> 
 <xsd:include schemaLocation="observation.xsd"/> 
 <xsd:include schemaLocation="defaultStyle.xsd"/> 
 <xsd:include schemaLocation="temporalReferenceSystems.xsd"/> 
 <!-- ====================================================================== --> 
</xsd:schema> 


C.19 gmlBase.xsd 


<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
<schema targetNamespace="http://www.opengis.net/gml" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" 
xmlns:sch="http://www.ascc.net/xml/schematron" xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink" 
xmlns:gml="http://www.opengis.net/gml" elementFormDefault="qualified" version="3.1.0"> 
 <annotation> 
  <appinfo source="urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-xsd:gmlBase:v3.1.0"> 
   <sch:title>Schematron validation</sch:title> 
   <sch:ns prefix="gml" uri="http://www.opengis.net/gml"/> 
   <sch:ns prefix="xlink" uri="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink"/> 
   <sch:pattern name="Check either href or content not both"> 
    <sch:rule abstract="true" id="hrefOrContent"> 
     <sch:report test="@xlink:href and (*|text())"> 
            Property element may not carry both a reference to an object and contain an object.</sch:report> 
     <sch:assert test="@xlink:href | (*|text())"> 
            Property element must either carry a reference to an object or contain an object.</sch:assert> 
    </sch:rule> 
   </sch:pattern> 
  </appinfo> 
  <documentation> 
   GML base schema for GML 3.1  
   Components to support the GML encoding model.   
    
   The abstract Schematron rules can be used by any schema that includes gmlBase.   
    </documentation> 
 </annotation> 
 <!-- ============================================================== 
       includes and imports 
 ============================================================== --> 
 <include schemaLocation="basicTypes.xsd"/> 
 <import namespace="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink" schemaLocation="../xlink/xlinks.xsd"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <!-- ==================== Objects ================================ --> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <!-- =========== Abstract "Object" is "anyType" ============= --> 
 <!-- ===== Global element at the head of the "Object" substitution group ======== --> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


390  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 <element name="_Object" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>This abstract element is the head of a substitutionGroup hierararchy which may contain either 
simpleContent or complexContent elements.  It is used to assert the model position of "class" elements declared in other GML 
schemas.  </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- ============================================================= --> 
 <!-- =========== Abstract "GMLobject" supertype ========================= --> 
 <element name="_GML" type="gml:AbstractGMLType" abstract="true" substitutionGroup="gml:_Object"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Global element which acts as the head of a substitution group that may include any element which 
is a GML feature, object, geometry or complex value</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <group name="StandardObjectProperties"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>This content model group makes it easier to construct types that  
      derive from AbstractGMLType and its descendents "by restriction".   
      A reference to the group saves having to enumerate the standard object properties.  </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:metaDataProperty" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
   <element ref="gml:description" minOccurs="0"/> 
   <element ref="gml:name" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
    <annotation> 
     <documentation>Multiple names may be provided.  These will often be distinguished by being assigned by 
different authorities, as indicated by the value of the codeSpace attribute.  In an instance document there will usually only be one 
name per authority. </documentation> 
    </annotation> 
   </element> 
  </sequence> 
 </group> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="AbstractGMLType" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>All complexContent GML elements are directly or indirectly derived from this abstract supertype  
 to establish a hierarchy of GML types that may be distinguished from other XML types by their ancestry.  
 Elements in this hierarchy may have an ID and are thus referenceable.  </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <group ref="gml:StandardObjectProperties"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attribute ref="gml:id" use="optional"/> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <!-- =========== Concrete "Collection" supertype ========================= --> 
 <element name="Bag" type="gml:BagType" substitutionGroup="gml:_GML"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Generic GML element to contain a heterogeneous collection of GML _Objects</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="BagType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A non-abstract generic collection type that can be used as a document element for a collection of 
any GML types - Geometries, Topologies, Features ... 
 
FeatureCollections may only contain Features.  GeometryCollections may only contain Geometrys.  Bags are less 
constrained  they must contain objects that are substitutable for gml:_Object.  This may mix several levels, including Features, 
Definitions, Dictionaries, Geometries etc.   
 
The content model would ideally be  
   member 0..* 
   members 0..1 
   member 0..* 
for maximum flexibility in building a collection from both homogeneous and distinct components:  
included "member" elements each contain a single Object 
an included "members" element contains a set of Objects  
 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 391 
 


 


However, this is non-deterministic, thus prohibited by XSD.   
 
</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGMLType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:member" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:members" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <!-- =========== Concrete "Array" supertype ========================= --> 
 <element name="Array" type="gml:ArrayType" substitutionGroup="gml:_GML"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Generic GML element to contain a homogeneous array of GML _Objects</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- ======================================================================= --> 
 <complexType name="ArrayType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A non-abstract generic collection type that can be used as a document element for a homogeneous 
collection of any GML types - Geometries, Topologies, Features ...</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGMLType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:members" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <!-- =========== Abstract Metadata supertype ========================= --> 
 <element name="_MetaData" type="gml:AbstractMetaDataType" abstract="true" substitutionGroup="gml:_Object"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Abstract element which acts as the head of a substitution group for packages of MetaData 
properties.  </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="AbstractMetaDataType" abstract="true" mixed="true"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> An abstract base type for complex metadata types.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <attribute ref="gml:id" use="optional"/> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <!-- =========== Container for Generic Metadata ========================= --> 
 <element name="GenericMetaData" type="gml:GenericMetaDataType" substitutionGroup="gml:_MetaData"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Concrete element in the _MetaData substitution group, which permits any well-formed XML content.  
Intended to act as a container for metadata defined in external schemas, for which it is not possible to add the concrete 
components to the GML _MetaData substitution group directly. Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="GenericMetaDataType" mixed="true"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Deprecated with GML version 3.1.0.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent mixed="true"> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractMetaDataType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <any processContents="lax" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


392  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <!-- ================== Base Property Types ============================== --> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <!-- ==== property types for unspecified association - by Value or by Reference ==== --> 
 <!-- ====== single Objects - by Value or by Reference ======== --> 
 <element name="_association" type="gml:AssociationType" abstract="true"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="_strictAssociation" type="gml:AssociationType" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 
   <appinfo> 
    <sch:pattern name="refAndContent co-occurence prohibited"> 
     <sch:rule context="gml:_strictAssociation"> 
      <sch:extends rule="hrefOrContent"/> 
     </sch:rule> 
    </sch:pattern> 
   </appinfo> 
   <documentation>must carry a reference to an object or contain an object but not both</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="member" type="gml:AssociationType"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="AssociationType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>  A pattern or base for derived types used to specify complex types corresponding to an  unspecified 
UML association - either composition or aggregation.  Restricts the cardinality of Objects contained in the association to a 
maximum of one.  An instance of this type can contain an element representing an Object, or serve as a pointer to a remote 
Object.   
 
Descendents of this type can be restricted in an application schema to  
* allow only specified classes as valid participants in the aggregation 
* allow only association by reference (i.e. empty the content model) or by value (i.e. remove the xlinks).     
 
When used for association by reference, the value of the gml:remoteSchema attribute can be used to locate a schema fragment 
that constrains the target instance.    
 
In many cases it is desirable to impose the constraint prohibiting the occurence of both reference and value in the same instance, 
as that would be ambiguous.  This is accomplished by adding a directive in the annotation element of the element declaration.  
This directive can be in the form of normative prose, or can use a Schematron pattern to automatically constrain co-occurrence - 
see the declaration for _strictAssociation below.    
 
If co-occurence is not prohibited, then both a link and content may be present.  If this occurs in an instance, then the rule for 
interpretation is that the instance found by traversing the href provides the normative value of the property, and should be used 
when possible.  The value(s) included as content may be used if the remote instance cannot be resolved.  This may be 
considered to be a "cached" version of the value(s).    </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:_Object" minOccurs="0"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="_reference" type="gml:ReferenceType" abstract="true"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="ReferenceType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>  A pattern or base for derived types used to specify complex types corresponding to a UML 
aggregation association.  An instance of this type serves as a pointer to a remote Object.   
 </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence/> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <!-- ========= multiple objects  - by Value or by Reference ================== --> 
 <element name="members" type="gml:ArrayAssociationType"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="ArrayAssociationType"> 
  <annotation> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 393 
 


 


   <documentation>  A base for derived types used to specify complex types containing an array of objects, by 
unspecified UML association - either composition or aggregation.  An instance of this type contains elements representing 
Objects. 
 
Ideally this type would be derived by extension of AssociationType.   
However, this leads to a non-deterministic content model, since both the base and the extension have minOccurs="0", and is thus 
prohibited in XML Schema. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:_Object" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <!-- =========== Abstract "property" supertype ========================= --> 
 <element name="metaDataProperty" type="gml:MetaDataPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Contains or refers to a metadata package that contains metadata properties.  </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="MetaDataPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Base type for complex metadata property types.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <choice minOccurs="0"> 
   <element ref="gml:_MetaData"/> 
   <any processContents="lax"/> 
  </choice> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
  <attribute name="about" type="anyURI" use="optional"/> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <!-- ========================================================== 
 global attribute, attribute group and element declarations  
 ============================================================  --> 
 <attribute name="id" type="ID"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Database handle for the object.  It is of XML type ID, so is constrained to be unique in the XML 
document within which it occurs.  An external identifier for the object in the form of a URI may be constructed using standard XML 
and XPointer methods.  This is done by concatenating the URI for the document, a fragment separator #, and the value of the id 
attribute.  </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </attribute> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <attribute name="remoteSchema" type="anyURI"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Reference to an XML Schema fragment that specifies the content model of the propertys value. 
This is in conformance with the XML Schema Section 4.14 Referencing Schemas from Elsewhere. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </attribute> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <attributeGroup name="AssociationAttributeGroup"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Attribute group used to enable property elements to refer to their value remotely. It contains the 
simple link components from xlinks.xsd, with all members optional, and the remoteSchema attribute, which is also optional.  
These attributes can be attached to any element, thus allowing it to act as a pointer. The 'remoteSchema' attribute allows an 
element  that carries link attributes to indicate that the element is declared  in a remote schema rather than by the schema that 
constrains the current document instance. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <attributeGroup ref="xlink:simpleLink"/> 
  <attribute ref="gml:remoteSchema" use="optional"/> 
 </attributeGroup> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="name" type="gml:CodeType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Label for the object, normally a descriptive name. An object may have several names, typically 
assigned by different authorities.  The authority for a name is indicated by the value of its (optional) codeSpace attribute.  The 
name may or may not be unique, as determined by the rules of the organization responsible for the codeSpace. 
</documentation> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


394  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="description" type="gml:StringOrRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Contains a simple text description of the object, or refers to an external description.  
</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- ===================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="StringOrRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> 
This type is available wherever there is a need for a "text" type property. It is of string type, so the text can be included inline, but 
the value can also be referenced remotely via xlinks from the AssociationAttributeGroup. If the remote reference is present, then 
the value obtained by traversing the link should be used, and the string content of the element can be used for an annotation.  
</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <simpleContent> 
   <extension base="string"> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </extension> 
  </simpleContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ===================================================== --> 
</schema> 


C.20 grids.xsd 


<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
<schema targetNamespace="http://www.opengis.net/gml" xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink" 
xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" xmlns:gml="http://www.opengis.net/gml" elementFormDefault="qualified" 
version="3.1.0"> 
 <annotation> 
  <appinfo source="urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-xsd:grids:v3.1.0">grids.xsd</appinfo> 
  <documentation xml:lang="en">Grid geometries 
    A subset of implicit geometries 
    Designed for use with GML Coverage schema, but maybe useful elsewhere as well.   
     
    Copyright (c) 2002 OGC, All Rights Reserved. 
    </documentation> 
 </annotation> 
 <!-- ============================================================== 
       includes and imports 
 ============================================================== --> 
 <include schemaLocation="geometryBasic0d1d.xsd"/> 
 <!-- ============================================================== 
       global elements 
 ============================================================== --> 
 <element name="_ImplicitGeometry" type="gml:AbstractGeometryType" abstract="true" 
substitutionGroup="gml:_Geometry"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="Grid" type="gml:GridType" substitutionGroup="gml:_ImplicitGeometry"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="GridType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Implicitly defines an unrectified grid, which is a network composed of two or more sets of equally 
spaced parallel lines in which the members of each set intersect the members of the other sets at right angles.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGeometryType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element name="limits" type="gml:GridLimitsType"/> 
     <element name="axisName" type="string" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute name="dimension" type="positiveInteger" use="required"/> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 395 
 


 


 <complexType name="GridLimitsType"> 
  <sequence> 
   <element name="GridEnvelope" type="gml:GridEnvelopeType"/> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="GridEnvelopeType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Provides grid coordinate values for the diametrically opposed corners of an envelope that bounds a 
section of grid. The value of a single coordinate is the number of offsets from the origin of the grid in the direction of a specific 
axis.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element name="low" type="gml:integerList"/> 
   <element name="high" type="gml:integerList"/> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="RectifiedGrid" type="gml:RectifiedGridType" substitutionGroup="gml:Grid"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="RectifiedGridType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A rectified grid has an origin and vectors that define its post locations.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:GridType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element name="origin" type="gml:PointPropertyType"/> 
     <element name="offsetVector" type="gml:VectorType" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
</schema> 


C.21 measures.xsd 


<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
<xsd:schema targetNamespace="http://www.opengis.net/gml" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" 
xmlns:xsd="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" xmlns:gml="http://www.opengis.net/gml" elementFormDefault="qualified" 
version="3.00" xml:lang="en"> 
 <xsd:annotation> 
  <xsd:appinfo source="urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-measures:v3.1.0"/> 
  <xsd:documentation> 
   <name>measures.xsd</name> 
   <version>3.0</version> 
   <scope>How to encode measures, each with associated unit of measure (uom). </scope> 
   <description>Extends the units.xsd and basicTypes.xsd schemas with types for recording measures using specific 
types of units, especially the measures and units needed for coordinate reference systems and coordinate operations. The 
specific unit types encoded are length, angle, scale factor, time, area, volume, speed, and grid length. This schema allows angle 
values to be recorded as single numbers or in degree-minute-second format. GML 3.0 candidate schema, primary editor: Arliss 
Whiteside. Last updated 2002/11/13. </description> 
   <copyright>Copyright (c) 2001-2002 OpenGIS, All Rights Reserved</copyright> 
   <conformance>Parts of this schema are based on Subclause 6.5.7 of ISO/CD 19103 Geographic information - 
Conceptual schema language, on Subclause A.5.2.2.3 of ISO/CD 19118 Geographic information - Encoding, and on Subclause 
4.7 of OpenGIS Recommendation Paper OGC 02-007r4 Units of Measure Use and Definition Recommendations. 
</conformance> 
  </xsd:documentation> 
 </xsd:annotation> 
 <!-- ============================================================== 
       includes and imports 
 ============================================================== --> 
 <xsd:include schemaLocation="units.xsd"/> 
 <!-- ============================================================== 
       elements and types 
 ============================================================== --> 
 <!-- This schema uses the gml:MeasureType defined in basicTypes.xsd with the modified meaning: 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


396  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


   <documentation>Value of a quantity, with its units. This element uses the XML Schema primitive data type "double" 
because it supports both decimal and scientific notation, and thus offers flexibility and precision. However, there is no requirement 
to store values using any particular format, and applications receiving elements of this type may choose to coerce the data to any 
other type as convenient. The XML attribute uom references the units or scale by which the amount should be multiplied. For a 
reference within the same XML document, the abbreviated XPointer prefix "#" symbol should be used, followed by a text 
abbreviation of the unit name. However, the "#" symbol may be optional, and still may be interpreted as a reference. 
</documentation> --> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <xsd:element name="measure" type="gml:MeasureType"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <xsd:complexType name="LengthType"> 
  <xsd:annotation> 
   <xsd:documentation>Value of a length (or distance) quantity, with its units. Uses the MeasureType with the restriction 
that the unit of measure referenced by uom must be suitable for a length, such as metres or feet. </xsd:documentation> 
  </xsd:annotation> 
  <xsd:simpleContent> 
   <xsd:extension base="gml:MeasureType"/> 
  </xsd:simpleContent> 
 </xsd:complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <xsd:complexType name="ScaleType"> 
  <xsd:annotation> 
   <xsd:documentation>Value of a scale factor (or ratio) that has no physical unit. Uses the MeasureType with the 
restriction that the unit of measure referenced by uom must be suitable for a scale factor, such as percent, permil, or parts-per-
million. </xsd:documentation> 
  </xsd:annotation> 
  <xsd:simpleContent> 
   <xsd:extension base="gml:MeasureType"/> 
  </xsd:simpleContent> 
 </xsd:complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <xsd:complexType name="TimeType"> 
  <xsd:annotation> 
   <xsd:documentation>Value of a time or temporal quantity, with its units. Uses the MeasureType with the restriction 
that the unit of measure referenced by uom must be suitable for a time value, such as seconds or weeks. </xsd:documentation> 
  </xsd:annotation> 
  <xsd:simpleContent> 
   <xsd:extension base="gml:MeasureType"/> 
  </xsd:simpleContent> 
 </xsd:complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <xsd:complexType name="GridLengthType"> 
  <xsd:annotation> 
   <xsd:documentation>Value of a length (or distance) quantity in a grid, where the grid spacing does not have any 
associated physical units, or does not have a constant physical spacing. This grid length will often be used in a digital image grid, 
where the base units are likely to be pixel spacings. Uses the MeasureType with the restriction that the unit of measure 
referenced by uom must be suitable for length along the axes of a grid, such as pixel spacings or grid spacings. 
</xsd:documentation> 
  </xsd:annotation> 
  <xsd:simpleContent> 
   <xsd:extension base="gml:MeasureType"/> 
  </xsd:simpleContent> 
 </xsd:complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <xsd:complexType name="AreaType"> 
  <xsd:annotation> 
   <xsd:documentation>Value of a spatial area quantity, with its units. Uses the MeasureType with the restriction that 
the unit of measure referenced by uom must be suitable for an area, such as square metres or square miles. 
</xsd:documentation> 
  </xsd:annotation> 
  <xsd:simpleContent> 
   <xsd:extension base="gml:MeasureType"/> 
  </xsd:simpleContent> 
 </xsd:complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <xsd:complexType name="VolumeType"> 
  <xsd:annotation> 
   <xsd:documentation>Value of a spatial volume quantity, with its units. Uses the MeasureType with the restriction that 
the unit of measure referenced by uom must be suitable for a volume, such as cubic metres or cubic feet. </xsd:documentation> 
  </xsd:annotation> 
  <xsd:simpleContent> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 397 
 


 


   <xsd:extension base="gml:MeasureType"/> 
  </xsd:simpleContent> 
 </xsd:complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <xsd:complexType name="SpeedType"> 
  <xsd:annotation> 
   <xsd:documentation>Value of a speed, with its units. Uses the MeasureType with the restriction that the unit of 
measure referenced by uom must be suitable for a velocity, such as metres per second or miles per hour.</xsd:documentation> 
  </xsd:annotation> 
  <xsd:simpleContent> 
   <xsd:extension base="gml:MeasureType"/> 
  </xsd:simpleContent> 
 </xsd:complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <xsd:complexType name="AngleChoiceType"> 
  <xsd:annotation> 
   <xsd:documentation>Value of an angle quantity provided in either degree-minute-second format or single value 
format. </xsd:documentation> 
  </xsd:annotation> 
  <xsd:choice> 
   <xsd:element ref="gml:angle"/> 
   <xsd:element ref="gml:dmsAngle"/> 
  </xsd:choice> 
 </xsd:complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <xsd:element name="angle" type="gml:AngleType"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <xsd:complexType name="AngleType"> 
  <xsd:annotation> 
   <xsd:documentation>Value of an angle quantity recorded as a single number, with its units. Uses the MeasureType 
with the restriction that the unit of measure referenced by uom must be suitable for an angle, such as degrees or radians. 
</xsd:documentation> 
  </xsd:annotation> 
  <xsd:simpleContent> 
   <xsd:extension base="gml:MeasureType"/> 
  </xsd:simpleContent> 
 </xsd:complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <xsd:element name="dmsAngle" type="gml:DMSAngleType"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <xsd:complexType name="DMSAngleType"> 
  <xsd:annotation> 
   <xsd:documentation>Angle value provided in degree-minute-second or degree-minute format. </xsd:documentation> 
  </xsd:annotation> 
  <xsd:sequence> 
   <xsd:element ref="gml:degrees"/> 
   <xsd:choice minOccurs="0"> 
    <xsd:element ref="gml:decimalMinutes"/> 
    <xsd:sequence> 
     <xsd:element ref="gml:minutes"/> 
     <xsd:element ref="gml:seconds" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </xsd:sequence> 
   </xsd:choice> 
  </xsd:sequence> 
 </xsd:complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <xsd:element name="degrees" type="gml:DegreesType"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <xsd:complexType name="DegreesType"> 
  <xsd:annotation> 
   <xsd:documentation>Integer number of degrees, plus the angle direction. This element can be used for geographic 
Latitude and Longitude. For Latitude, the XML attribute direction can take the values "N" or "S", meaning North or South of the 
equator. For Longitude, direction can take the values "E" or "W", meaning East or West of the prime meridian. This element can 
also be used for other angles. In that case, the direction can take the values "+" or "-" (of SignType), in the specified rotational 
direction from a specified reference direction. </xsd:documentation> 
  </xsd:annotation> 
  <xsd:simpleContent> 
   <xsd:extension base="gml:DegreeValueType"> 
    <xsd:attribute name="direction"> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


398  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


     <xsd:simpleType> 
      <xsd:union> 
       <xsd:simpleType> 
        <xsd:restriction base="string"> 
         <xsd:enumeration value="N"/> 
         <xsd:enumeration value="E"/> 
         <xsd:enumeration value="S"/> 
         <xsd:enumeration value="W"/> 
        </xsd:restriction> 
       </xsd:simpleType> 
       <xsd:simpleType> 
        <xsd:restriction base="gml:SignType"/> 
       </xsd:simpleType> 
      </xsd:union> 
     </xsd:simpleType> 
    </xsd:attribute> 
   </xsd:extension> 
  </xsd:simpleContent> 
 </xsd:complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <xsd:simpleType name="DegreeValueType"> 
  <xsd:annotation> 
   <xsd:documentation>Integer number of degrees in a degree-minute-second or degree-minute angular value, without 
indication of direction. </xsd:documentation> 
  </xsd:annotation> 
  <xsd:restriction base="nonNegativeInteger"> 
   <xsd:maxInclusive value="359"/> 
  </xsd:restriction> 
 </xsd:simpleType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <xsd:element name="decimalMinutes" type="gml:DecimalMinutesType"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <xsd:simpleType name="DecimalMinutesType"> 
  <xsd:annotation> 
   <xsd:documentation>Decimal number of arc-minutes in a degree-minute angular value. </xsd:documentation> 
  </xsd:annotation> 
  <xsd:restriction base="decimal"> 
   <xsd:minInclusive value="0.00"/> 
   <xsd:maxExclusive value="60.00"/> 
  </xsd:restriction> 
 </xsd:simpleType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <xsd:element name="minutes" type="gml:ArcMinutesType"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <xsd:simpleType name="ArcMinutesType"> 
  <xsd:annotation> 
   <xsd:documentation>Integer number of arc-minutes in a degree-minute-second angular value. </xsd:documentation> 
  </xsd:annotation> 
  <xsd:restriction base="nonNegativeInteger"> 
   <xsd:maxInclusive value="59"/> 
  </xsd:restriction> 
 </xsd:simpleType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <xsd:element name="seconds" type="gml:ArcSecondsType"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <xsd:simpleType name="ArcSecondsType"> 
  <xsd:annotation> 
   <xsd:documentation>Number of arc-seconds in a degree-minute-second angular value. </xsd:documentation> 
  </xsd:annotation> 
  <xsd:restriction base="decimal"> 
   <xsd:minInclusive value="0.00"/> 
   <xsd:maxExclusive value="60.00"/> 
  </xsd:restriction> 
 </xsd:simpleType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
</xsd:schema> 


C.22 observation.xsd 


<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 399 
 


 


<schema targetNamespace="http://www.opengis.net/gml" xmlns:gml="http://www.opengis.net/gml" 
xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" elementFormDefault="qualified" version="3.1.0_20031217"> 
 <annotation> 
  <appinfo source="urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-xsd:observation:v3.1.0">observation.xsd</appinfo> 
  <documentation>Observation schema for GML 3.1      
    </documentation> 
 </annotation> 
 <!-- =================================================================== --> 
 <!-- ===       includes and imports ============================================ --> 
 <include schemaLocation="feature.xsd"/> 
 <include schemaLocation="direction.xsd"/> 
 <include schemaLocation="valueObjects.xsd"/> 
 <!-- =================================================================== --> 
 <!-- =================== properties =================================== --> 
 <element name="using" type="gml:FeaturePropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>This element contains or points to a description of a sensor, instrument or procedure used for the 
observation</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================================== --> 
 <element name="target" type="gml:TargetPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>This element contains or points to the specimen, region or station which is the object of the 
observation</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================================== --> 
 <element name="subject" type="gml:TargetPropertyType" substitutionGroup="gml:target"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Synonym for target - common word used for photographs</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="TargetPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Container for an object representing the target or subject of an observation.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <choice minOccurs="0"> 
   <element ref="gml:_Feature"/> 
   <element ref="gml:_Geometry"/> 
  </choice> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================================== --> 
 <element name="resultOf" type="gml:AssociationType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>The result of the observation: an image, external object, etc</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================================== --> 
 <!-- ===================== Features =========================== --> 
 <element name="Observation" type="gml:ObservationType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Feature"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="ObservationType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractFeatureType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:validTime"/> 
     <element ref="gml:using" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:target" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:resultOf"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="DirectedObservation" type="gml:DirectedObservationType" substitutionGroup="gml:Observation"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


400  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 <complexType name="DirectedObservationType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:ObservationType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:direction"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="DirectedObservationAtDistance" type="gml:DirectedObservationAtDistanceType" 
substitutionGroup="gml:DirectedObservation"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="DirectedObservationAtDistanceType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:DirectedObservationType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element name="distance" type="gml:MeasureType"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
</schema> 


C.23 referenceSystems.xsd 


<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
<schema targetNamespace="http://www.opengis.net/gml" xmlns:gml="http://www.opengis.net/gml" 
xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" elementFormDefault="qualified" version="3.1.0" xml:lang="en"> 
 <annotation> 
  <appinfo source="urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-referenceSystems"/> 
  <documentation> 
   <name>referenceSystems.xsd</name> 
   <version>3.1.0</version> 
   <scope>How to encode reference system definitions. </scope> 
   <description>Builds on several other parts of GML 3 to encode the data needed to define reference systems. Primary 
editor: Arliss Whiteside. Last updated 2003/10/16. </description> 
   <copyright>Copyright (c) 2002-2003 Open GIS Consortium, All Rights Reserved.</copyright> 
   <conformance>This schema encodes the Reference System (RS_) package of the extended UML Model for OGC 
Abstract Specification Topic 2: Spatial Referencing by Coordinates. That UML model is adapted from ISO 19111 - Spatial 
referencing by coordinates, as described in Annex C of Topic 2. The SC_CRS class is also encoded here, to eliminate the 
(circular) references from coordinateOperations.xsd to coordinateReferenceSystems.xsd. The 
RS_SpatialReferenceSystemUsingGeographicIdentifier class is not encoded, since it is not applicable to coordinate positions. 
The CI_Citation class is not directly encoded, since such information can be included as metaDataProperty elements which are 
optionally allowed. A modified version of the EX_Extent (DataType) class from ISO 19115 is currently encoded here, using GML 
3 schema types. (A more extensive version of the EX_Extent package might be XML encoded in the future, probably in a 
separate extent.xsd schema.) </conformance> 
  </documentation> 
 </annotation> 
 <!-- ====================================================== 
       includes and imports 
 ====================================================== --> 
 <include schemaLocation="geometryBasic2d.xsd"/> 
 <include schemaLocation="temporal.xsd"/> 
 <!-- ====================================================== 
       elements and types 
 ====================================================== --> 
 <element name="_ReferenceSystem" type="gml:AbstractReferenceSystemType" abstract="true" 
substitutionGroup="gml:Definition"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="AbstractReferenceSystemBaseType" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Basic encoding for reference system objects, simplifying and restricting the DefinitionType as 
needed. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:DefinitionType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:metaDataProperty" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 401 
 


 


     <element ref="gml:remarks" minOccurs="0"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>Comments on or information about this reference system, including source 
information. </documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
     <element ref="gml:srsName"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute ref="gml:id" use="required"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="srsName" type="gml:SimpleNameType" substitutionGroup="gml:name"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>The name by which this reference system is identified. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="AbstractReferenceSystemType" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Description of a spatial and/or temporal reference system used by a dataset. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractReferenceSystemBaseType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:srsID" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>Set of alterative identifications of this reference system. The first srsID, if any, is 
normally the primary identification code, and any others are aliases. </documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
     <element ref="gml:validArea" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element ref="gml:scope" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="srsID" type="gml:IdentifierType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>An identification of a reference system. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="referenceSystemRef" type="gml:ReferenceSystemRefType" substitutionGroup="gml:dictionaryEntry"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="ReferenceSystemRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to a reference system, either referencing or containing the definition of that reference 
system. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:DictionaryEntryType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:_ReferenceSystem" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="_CRS" type="gml:AbstractCRSType" abstract="true" substitutionGroup="gml:_ReferenceSystem"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="AbstractCRSType" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Abstract coordinate reference system, usually defined by a coordinate system and a datum. This 
abstract complexType shall not be used, extended, or restricted, in an Application Schema, to define a concrete subtype with a 
meaning equivalent to a concrete subtype specified in this document. </documentation> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


402  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractReferenceSystemType"/> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="crsRef" type="gml:CRSRefType" substitutionGroup="gml:referenceSystemRef"/> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="CRSRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Association to a CRS abstract coordinate reference system, either referencing or containing the 
definition of that CRS. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:ReferenceSystemRefType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:_CRS" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="SimpleNameType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>The primary name of a reference system object. The string in the CodeType contains the object 
identification name, and the codeSpace attribute is not included. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <simpleContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:CodeType"> 
    <attribute name="codeSpace" type="anyURI" use="prohibited"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </simpleContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="IdentifierType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>An identification of a CRS object. The first use of the IdentifierType for an object, if any, is normally 
the primary identification code, and any others are aliases. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:name"> 
    <annotation> 
     <documentation>The code or name for this Identifier, often from a controlled list or pattern defined by a code 
space. The optional codeSpace attribute is normally included to identify or reference a code space within which one or more 
codes are defined. This code space is often defined by some authority organization, where one organization may define multiple 
code spaces. The range and format of each Code Space identifier is defined by that code space authority. Information about that 
code space authority can be included as metaDataProperty elements which are optionally allowed in all CRS objects. 
</documentation> 
    </annotation> 
   </element> 
   <element ref="gml:version" minOccurs="0"/> 
   <element ref="gml:remarks" minOccurs="0"> 
    <annotation> 
     <documentation>Remarks about this code or alias. </documentation> 
    </annotation> 
   </element> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="version" type="string"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Identifier of the version of the associated codeSpace or code, as specified by the codeSpace or 
code authority. This version is included only when the "code" or "codeSpace" uses versions. When appropriate, the version is 
identified by the effective date, coded using ISO 8601 date format. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="remarks" type="gml:StringOrRefType" substitutionGroup="gml:description"> 
  <annotation> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 403 
 


 


   <documentation>Information about this object or code. Contains text or refers to external text.  </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="scope" type="string"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Description of domain of usage, or limitations of usage, for which this CRS object is valid. 
</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="validArea" type="gml:ExtentType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Area or region in which this CRS object is valid. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="ExtentType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Information about the spatial, vertical, and/or temporal extent of a reference system object. 
Constraints: At least one of the elements "description", "boundingBox", "boundingPolygon", "verticalExtent", and temporalExtent" 
must be included, but more that one can be included when appropriate. Furthermore, more than one "boundingBox", 
"boundingPolygon", "verticalExtent", and/or temporalExtent" element can be included, with more than one meaning the union of 
the individual domains. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:description" minOccurs="0"> 
    <annotation> 
     <documentation>Description of spatial and/or temporal extent of this object. </documentation> 
    </annotation> 
   </element> 
   <choice> 
    <annotation> 
     <documentation>Geographic domain of this reference system object. </documentation> 
    </annotation> 
    <element ref="gml:boundingBox" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
     <annotation> 
      <documentation>Unordered list of bounding boxes (or envelopes) whose union describes the spatial 
domain of this object. </documentation> 
     </annotation> 
    </element> 
    <element ref="gml:boundingPolygon" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
     <annotation> 
      <documentation>Unordered list of bounding polygons whose union describes the spatial domain of this 
object. </documentation> 
     </annotation> 
    </element> 
   </choice> 
   <element ref="gml:verticalExtent" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
    <annotation> 
     <documentation>Unordered list of vertical intervals whose union describes the spatial domain of this object. 
</documentation> 
    </annotation> 
   </element> 
   <element ref="gml:temporalExtent" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
    <annotation> 
     <documentation>Unordered list of time periods whose union describes the spatial domain of this object. 
</documentation> 
    </annotation> 
   </element> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="boundingBox" type="gml:EnvelopeType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A bounding box (or envelope) defining the spatial domain of this object. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


404  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 <element name="boundingPolygon" type="gml:PolygonType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A bounding polygon defining the horizontal spatial domain of this object. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="verticalExtent" type="gml:EnvelopeType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>An interval defining the vertical spatial domain of this object. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
 <element name="temporalExtent" type="gml:TimePeriodType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A time period defining the temporal domain of this object. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =================================================== --> 
</schema> 


C.24 temporal.xsd 


<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
<schema targetNamespace="http://www.opengis.net/gml" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" 
xmlns:gml="http://www.opengis.net/gml" elementFormDefault="qualified" version="3.1.0"> 
 <annotation> 
  <appinfo source="urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-xsd:temporal:v3.1.0"/> 
  <documentation xml:lang="en"> 
    The temporal schema for GML 3.1 provides constructs for handling time-varying spatial data.  
    This schema reflects a partial implementation of the model described in ISO 19108:2002.  
    Copyright (c) 2004 OGC, All Rights Reserved.     
    </documentation> 
 </annotation> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <include schemaLocation="gmlBase.xsd"/> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <!-- ==== Time Object ===== --> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <element name="_TimeObject" type="gml:AbstractTimeObjectType" abstract="true" substitutionGroup="gml:_GML"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation xml:lang="en"> 
      This abstract element acts as the head of the substitution group for temporal primitives and complexes.   
      </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- ===================================== --> 
 <complexType name="AbstractTimeObjectType" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation xml:lang="en"> 
      The abstract supertype for temporal objects. 
      </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGMLType"/> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <!-- ==== Time Primitive ===== --> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <element name="_TimePrimitive" type="gml:AbstractTimePrimitiveType" abstract="true" 
substitutionGroup="gml:_TimeObject"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation xml:lang="en"> 
      This abstract element acts as the head of the substitution group for temporal primitives.   
      </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- ===================================== --> 
 <complexType name="AbstractTimePrimitiveType" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 405 
 


 


   <documentation xml:lang="en"> 
      The abstract supertype for temporal primitives. 
      </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractTimeObjectType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element name="relatedTime" type="gml:RelatedTimeType" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="TimePrimitivePropertyType"> 
  <sequence minOccurs="0"> 
   <element ref="gml:_TimePrimitive"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="RelatedTimeType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:TimePrimitivePropertyType"> 
    <attribute name="relativePosition"> 
     <simpleType> 
      <restriction base="string"> 
       <enumeration value="Before"/> 
       <enumeration value="After"/> 
       <enumeration value="Begins"/> 
       <enumeration value="Ends"/> 
       <enumeration value="During"/> 
       <enumeration value="Equals"/> 
       <enumeration value="Contains"/> 
       <enumeration value="Overlaps"/> 
       <enumeration value="Meets"/> 
       <enumeration value="OverlappedBy"/> 
       <enumeration value="MetBy"/> 
       <enumeration value="BegunBy"/> 
       <enumeration value="EndedBy"/> 
      </restriction> 
     </simpleType> 
    </attribute> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <!-- ==== Time Complex ===== --> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <element name="_TimeComplex" type="gml:AbstractTimeComplexType" abstract="true" 
substitutionGroup="gml:_TimeObject"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation xml:lang="en"> 
   This abstract element acts as the head of the substitution group for temporal complexes.  
   Temporal complex is an aggregation of temporal primitives as its components,  
   represents a temporal geometric complex and a temporal topology complex.  
   N.B. Temporal geometric complex is not defined in this schema.  
   </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="AbstractTimeComplexType" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation xml:lang="en"> 
 The abstract supertype for temporal complexes.  
 </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractTimeObjectType"/> 
  </complexContent> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


406  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 </complexType> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <!-- ==== Time Geometric Primitive ===== --> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <element name="_TimeGeometricPrimitive" type="gml:AbstractTimeGeometricPrimitiveType" abstract="true" 
substitutionGroup="gml:_TimePrimitive"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation xml:lang="en"> 
      This abstract element acts as the head of the substitution group for temporal geometric primitives.   
      </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- ===================================== --> 
 <complexType name="AbstractTimeGeometricPrimitiveType" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation xml:lang="en"> 
      The abstract supertype for temporal geometric primitives. 
       A temporal geometry must be associated with a temporal reference system via URI.  
       The Gregorian calendar with UTC is the default reference system, following ISO  
       8601. Other reference systems in common use include the GPS calendar and the  
       Julian calendar. 
      </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractTimePrimitiveType"> 
    <attribute name="frame" type="anyURI" use="optional" default="#ISO-8601"/> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="TimeGeometricPrimitivePropertyType"> 
  <sequence minOccurs="0"> 
   <element ref="gml:_TimeGeometricPrimitive"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <!-- ==== Time Instant ===== --> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <element name="TimeInstant" type="gml:TimeInstantType" substitutionGroup="gml:_TimeGeometricPrimitive"/> 
 <!-- ===================================== --> 
 <complexType name="TimeInstantType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Omit back-pointers begunBy, endedBy.  </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractTimeGeometricPrimitiveType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:timePosition"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="TimeInstantPropertyType"> 
  <sequence minOccurs="0"> 
   <element ref="gml:TimeInstant"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <!-- ==== Time Period ===== --> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <element name="TimePeriod" type="gml:TimePeriodType" substitutionGroup="gml:_TimeGeometricPrimitive"/> 
 <!-- ===================================== --> 
 <complexType name="TimePeriodType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractTimeGeometricPrimitiveType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <choice> 
      <element name="beginPosition" type="gml:TimePositionType"/> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 407 
 


 


      <element name="begin" type="gml:TimeInstantPropertyType"/> 
     </choice> 
     <choice> 
      <element name="endPosition" type="gml:TimePositionType"/> 
      <element name="end" type="gml:TimeInstantPropertyType"/> 
     </choice> 
     <element ref="gml:_timeLength" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="TimePeriodPropertyType"> 
  <sequence minOccurs="0"> 
   <element ref="gml:TimePeriod"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <!-- ==== duration & interval ===== --> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <element name="_timeLength" type="gml:TimeLengthType" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation xml:lang="en"> 
      This abstract element serves as the head of the substitution group for elements used  
      to indicate temporal length or distance (duration, interval).  
     </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- ===================================== --> 
 <simpleType name="TimeLengthType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation xml:lang="en"> 
      Base type for describing temporal length or distance. The value space is further  
      constrained by subtypes that conform to the ISO 8601 or ISO 11404 standards. 
      </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <union memberTypes="duration decimal"/> 
 </simpleType> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <element name="duration" type="duration" substitutionGroup="gml:_timeLength"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation xml:lang="en"> 
      This element is an instance of the primitive xsd:duration simple type to  
      enable use of the ISO 8601 syntax for temporal length (e.g. P5DT4H30M).  
      It is a valid subtype of TimeDurationType according to section 3.14.6,  
      rule 2.2.4 in XML Schema, Part 1. 
      </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <element name="timeInterval" type="gml:TimeIntervalLengthType" substitutionGroup="gml:_timeLength"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> 
   This element is a valid subtype of TimeDurationType  
   according to section 3.14.6, rule 2.2.4 in XML Schema, Part 1. 
      </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- ===================================== --> 
 <complexType name="TimeIntervalLengthType" final="#all"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation xml:lang="en"> 
      This type extends the built-in xsd:decimal simple type to allow floating-point  
      values for temporal length. According to  the ISO 11404 model you have to use  
      positiveInteger together with appropriate values for radix and factor. The  
      resolution of the time interval is to one radix ^(-factor) of the specified  
      time unit (e.g. unit="second", radix="10", factor="3" specifies a resolution  
      of milliseconds). It is a subtype of TimeDurationType. 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


408  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


      </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <simpleContent> 
   <extension base="decimal"> 
    <attribute name="unit" type="gml:TimeUnitType" use="required"/> 
    <attribute name="radix" type="positiveInteger" use="optional"/> 
    <attribute name="factor" type="integer" use="optional"/> 
   </extension> 
  </simpleContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <simpleType name="TimeUnitType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation xml:lang="en"> 
        Standard units for measuring time intervals (see ISO 31-1). 
      </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <union> 
   <simpleType> 
    <restriction base="string"> 
     <enumeration value="year"/> 
     <enumeration value="day"/> 
     <enumeration value="hour"/> 
     <enumeration value="minute"/> 
     <enumeration value="second"/> 
    </restriction> 
   </simpleType> 
   <simpleType> 
    <restriction base="string"> 
     <pattern value="other:\w{2,}"/> 
    </restriction> 
   </simpleType> 
  </union> 
 </simpleType> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <!-- ==== Time Position ===== --> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <element name="timePosition" type="gml:TimePositionType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Direct representation of a temporal position</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="TimePositionType" final="#all"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation xml:lang="en">Direct representation of a temporal position.  
      Indeterminate time values are also allowed, as described in ISO 19108. The indeterminatePosition  
      attribute can be used alone or it can qualify a specific value for temporal position (e.g. before  
      2002-12, after 1019624400).  
      For time values that identify position within a calendar, the calendarEraName attribute provides  
      the name of the calendar era to which the date is referenced (e.g. the Meiji era of the Japanese calendar). 
      </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <simpleContent> 
   <extension base="gml:TimePositionUnion"> 
    <attribute name="frame" type="anyURI" use="optional" default="#ISO-8601"/> 
    <attribute name="calendarEraName" type="string" use="optional"/> 
    <attribute name="indeterminatePosition" type="gml:TimeIndeterminateValueType" use="optional"/> 
   </extension> 
  </simpleContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <simpleType name="TimePositionUnion"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation xml:lang="en"> 
      The ISO 19108:2002 hierarchy of subtypes for temporal position are collapsed  
      by defining a union of XML Schema simple types for indicating temporal position relative  
      to a specific reference system.  
       
      Dates and dateTime may be indicated with varying degrees of precision.   
      dateTime by itself does not allow right-truncation, except for fractions of seconds.  







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 409 
 


 


      When used with non-Gregorian calendars based on years, months, days,  
      the same lexical representation should still be used, with leading zeros added if the  
      year value would otherwise have fewer than four digits.   
       
      An ordinal position may be referenced via URI identifying the definition of an ordinal era.   
       
      A time coordinate value is indicated as a decimal (e.g. UNIX time, GPS calendar). 
      </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <union memberTypes="gml:CalDate time dateTime anyURI decimal"/> 
 </simpleType> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <simpleType name="CalDate"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation xml:lang="en"> 
      Calendar dates may be indicated with varying degrees of precision,  
      using year, year-month, date.  
      When used with non-Gregorian calendars based on years, months, days,  
      the same lexical representation should still be used, with leading zeros added if the  
      year value would otherwise have fewer than four digits.   
      time is used for a position that recurs daily (see clause 5.4.4.2 of ISO 19108:2002).   
      </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <union memberTypes="date gYearMonth gYear"/> 
 </simpleType> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <simpleType name="TimeIndeterminateValueType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation xml:lang="en"> 
        This enumerated data type specifies values for indeterminate positions. 
      </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <restriction base="string"> 
   <enumeration value="after"/> 
   <enumeration value="before"/> 
   <enumeration value="now"/> 
   <enumeration value="unknown"/> 
  </restriction> 
 </simpleType> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <!-- ==== Convenience properties ==== --> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <element name="validTime" type="gml:TimePrimitivePropertyType"/> 
 <!-- ===================================== --> 
</schema> 


C.25 temporalReferenceSystems.xsd 


<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
<schema targetNamespace="http://www.opengis.net/gml" xmlns:gml="http://www.opengis.net/gml" 
xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" elementFormDefault="qualified" version="3.1.0"> 
 <annotation> 
  <appinfo source="urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-xsd:temporalReferenceSystems:v3.1.0"/> 
  <documentation xml:lang="en"> 
    The Temporal Reference Systems schema for GML 3.1 provides constructs for handling various styles of temporal reference 
system.  
    This schema reflects a partial implementation of the model described in ISO 19108:2002.  
    Copyright (c) 2004 OGC, All Rights Reserved.     
    </documentation> 
 </annotation> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <include schemaLocation="temporalTopology.xsd"/> 
 <include schemaLocation="dictionary.xsd"/> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <!-- == Time Reference System == --> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <element name="_TimeReferenceSystem" type="gml:AbstractTimeReferenceSystemType" abstract="true" 
substitutionGroup="gml:_GML"> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


410  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Abstract element serves primarily as the head of a substitution group for temporal reference 
systems.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- ===================================== --> 
 <complexType name="AbstractTimeReferenceSystemType" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation xml:lang="en"> 
        A value in the time domain is measured relative to a temporal reference system. Common  
        types of reference systems include calendars, ordinal temporal reference systems, and  
        temporal coordinate systems (time elapsed since some epoch, e.g. UNIX time). 
      </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:DefinitionType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element name="domainOfValidity" type="string" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <!-- == Time Coordinate System == --> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <element name="TimeCoordinateSystem" type="gml:TimeCoordinateSystemType" 
substitutionGroup="gml:_TimeReferenceSystem"/> 
 <!-- ===================================== --> 
 <complexType name="TimeCoordinateSystemType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation xml:lang="en"> 
      A temporal coordinate system is based on a continuous interval scale defined in terms of a single time interval. 
      </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractTimeReferenceSystemType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <choice> 
      <element name="originPosition" type="gml:TimePositionType"/> 
      <element name="origin" type="gml:TimeInstantPropertyType"/> 
     </choice> 
     <element name="interval" type="gml:TimeIntervalLengthType"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <!-- == Time Ordinal System == --> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <element name="TimeOrdinalReferenceSystem" type="gml:TimeOrdinalReferenceSystemType" 
substitutionGroup="gml:_TimeReferenceSystem"/> 
 <!-- ===================================== --> 
 <complexType name="TimeOrdinalReferenceSystemType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation xml:lang="en"> 
      In an ordinal reference system the order of events in time can be well  
      established, but the magnitude of the intervals between them can not be  
      accurately determined (e.g. a stratigraphic sequence). 
      </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractTimeReferenceSystemType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element name="component" type="gml:TimeOrdinalEraPropertyType" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <element name="TimeOrdinalEra" type="gml:TimeOrdinalEraType"/> 
 <!-- ===================================== --> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 411 
 


 


 <complexType name="TimeOrdinalEraType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation xml:lang="en"> 
      Ordinal temporal reference systems are often hierarchically structured  
      such that an ordinal era at a given level of the hierarchy includes a  
      sequence of shorter, coterminous ordinal eras. This captured using the member/group properties.   
       
      Note that in this schema, TIme Ordinal Era is patterned on TimeEdge, which is a variation from ISO 19108.   
      This is in order to fulfill the requirements of ordinal reference systems based on eras delimited by  
      named points or nodes, which are common in geology, archeology, etc.   
       
      This change is subject of a change proposal to ISO 
      </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:DefinitionType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element name="relatedTime" type="gml:RelatedTimeType" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element name="start" type="gml:TimeNodePropertyType"/> 
     <element name="end" type="gml:TimeNodePropertyType"/> 
     <element name="extent" type="gml:TimePeriodPropertyType" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <element name="member" type="gml:TimeOrdinalEraPropertyType" minOccurs="0" 
maxOccurs="unbounded"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>An Era may be composed of several member Eras. The "member" element 
implements the association to the Era at the next level down the hierarchy.  "member" follows the standard GML property pattern 
whereby its (complex) value may be either described fully inline, or may be the target of a link carried on the member element 
and described fully elsewhere, either in the same document or from another service. </documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
     <element name="group" type="gml:ReferenceType" minOccurs="0"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>In a particular Time System, an Era may be a member of a group.  The "group" 
element implements the back-pointer to the Era at the next level up in the hierarchy.  
 
If the hierarchy is represented by describing the nested components fully in the their nested position inside "member" elements, 
then the parent can be easily inferred, so the group property is unnecessary.   
 
However, if the hierarchy is represented by links carried on the "member" property elements, pointing to Eras described fully 
elsewhere, then it may be useful for a child (member) era to carry an explicit pointer back to its parent (group) Era.  
</documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="TimeOrdinalEraPropertyType"> 
  <sequence minOccurs="0"> 
   <element ref="gml:TimeOrdinalEra"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <!-- == Calendar == --> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <element name="TimeCalendar" type="gml:TimeCalendarType" substitutionGroup="gml:_TimeReferenceSystem"/> 
 <!-- ===================================== --> 
 <complexType name="TimeCalendarType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation xml:lang="en">A calendar is a discrete temporal reference system  
      that provides a basis for defining temporal position to a resolution of one day.  
      A single calendar may reference more than one calendar era.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractTimeReferenceSystemType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element name="referenceFrame" type="gml:TimeCalendarEraPropertyType" maxOccurs="unbounded"> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


412  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


      <annotation> 
       <documentation>Link to the CalendarEras that it uses as a reference for dating.</documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="TimeCalendarPropertyType"> 
  <sequence minOccurs="0"> 
   <element ref="gml:TimeCalendar"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <element name="TimeCalendarEra" type="gml:TimeCalendarEraType"/> 
 <!-- ===================================== --> 
 <complexType name="TimeCalendarEraType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation xml:lang="en"> 
      In every calendar, years are numbered relative to the date of a  
      reference event that defines a calendar era.  
      In this implementation, we omit the back-pointer "datingSystem".  </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:DefinitionType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element name="referenceEvent" type="gml:StringOrRefType"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>Name or description of a mythical or historic event which fixes the position of the 
base scale of the calendar era.</documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
     <element name="referenceDate" type="date" default="0001-01-01" minOccurs="0"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>Date of the referenceEvent expressed as a date in the given calendar.  
              In most calendars, this date is the origin (i.e., the first day) of the scale, but this is not always true.</documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
     <element name="julianReference" type="decimal"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>Julian date that corresponds to the reference date.   
              The Julian day numbering system is a temporal coordinate system that has an  
              origin earlier than any known calendar,  
              at noon on 1 January 4713 BC in the Julian proleptic calendar.   
              The Julian day number is an integer value;  
              the Julian date is a decimal value that allows greater resolution.  
              Transforming calendar dates to and from Julian dates provides a  
              relatively simple basis for transforming dates from one calendar to another.</documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
     <element name="epochOfUse" type="gml:TimePeriodPropertyType"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>Period for which the calendar era was used as a basis for dating.</documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="TimeCalendarEraPropertyType"> 
  <sequence minOccurs="0"> 
   <element ref="gml:TimeCalendarEra"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <!-- == Clock == --> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 413 
 


 


 <element name="TimeClock" type="gml:TimeClockType" substitutionGroup="gml:_TimeReferenceSystem"/> 
 <!-- ===================================== --> 
 <complexType name="TimeClockType" final="#all"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation xml:lang="en">A clock provides a basis for defining temporal position within a day.  
      A clock must be used with a calendar in order to provide a complete description of a temporal position  
      within a specific day.      </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractTimeReferenceSystemType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element name="referenceEvent" type="gml:StringOrRefType"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>Name or description of an event, such as solar noon or sunrise,  
              which fixes the position of the base scale of the clock.</documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
     <element name="referenceTime" type="time"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>time of day associated with the reference event expressed as  
              a time of day in the given clock. The reference time is usually the origin of the clock scale. </documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
     <element name="utcReference" type="time"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>24 hour local or UTC time that corresponds to the reference time.</documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
     <element name="dateBasis" type="gml:TimeCalendarPropertyType" minOccurs="0" 
maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="TimeClockPropertyType"> 
  <sequence minOccurs="0"> 
   <element ref="gml:TimeClock"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
</schema> 


C.26 temporalTopology.xsd 


<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
<schema targetNamespace="http://www.opengis.net/gml" xmlns:gml="http://www.opengis.net/gml" 
xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" elementFormDefault="qualified" 
version="3.1.0"> 
 <annotation> 
  <appinfo source="urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-xsd:temporalTopology:v3.1.0"/> 
  <documentation xml:lang="en"> 
  The temporal topology schema for ISO19136 provides constructs for handling topological complexes and  
  temporal feature relationships.  
  Temporal geometric characteristics of features are represented as instants and periods.  
  While, temporal context of features that does not relate to the position of time is described as connectivity relationships  
  among instants and periods. These relationships are called temporal topology as they do not change in time,  
  as long as the direction of time does not change.  
  It is used effectively in the case of describing a family tree expressing evolution of species, an ecological cycle,  
  a lineage of lands or buildings, or a history of separation and merger of administrative boundaries. 
  This schema reflects a partial yet consistent implementation of the model described in ISO 19108:2002.  
    Copyright (c) 2004 OGC, All Rights Reserved.     
    </documentation> 
 </annotation> 
 <!-- ===================================== --> 
 <include schemaLocation="temporal.xsd"/> 
 <!-- ===================================== --> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


414  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <!-- == TimeTopologyComplex == --> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <element name="TimeTopologyComplex" type="gml:TimeTopologyComplexType" substitutionGroup="gml:_TimeComplex"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation xml:lang="en"> 
 This element represents temporal topology complex. It shall be the connected acyclic directed graph composed of time nodes 
and time edges. 
   </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="TimeTopologyComplexType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation xml:lang="en">A temporal topology complex.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractTimeComplexType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element name="primitive" type="gml:TimeTopologyPrimitivePropertyType" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="TimeTopologyComplexPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A time topology complex property can either be any time topology complex element 
    encapsulated in an element of this type or an XLink reference to a remote time topology complex element  
    (where remote includes elements located elsewhere in the same document).  
    Note that either the reference or the contained element must be given, but not both or none. 
    </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:TimeTopologyComplex" minOccurs="0"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <!--  == TimeTopologyPrimitive == --> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <element name="_TimeTopologyPrimitive" type="gml:AbstractTimeTopologyPrimitiveType" abstract="true" 
substitutionGroup="gml:_TimePrimitive"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation xml:lang="en"> 
 This abstract element acts as the head of the substitution group for temporal topology primitives. 
  </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="AbstractTimeTopologyPrimitiveType" abstract="true"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation xml:lang="en">The element "complex" carries a reference to the complex containing this 
primitive.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractTimePrimitiveType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element name="complex" type="gml:ReferenceType" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="TimeTopologyPrimitivePropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A time topology primitive property can either hold any time topology complex element 
    eor carry an XLink reference to a remote time topology complex element  
    (where remote includes elements located elsewhere in the same document).  
    Note that either the reference or the contained element must be given, but not both or none. 
    </documentation> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 415 
 


 


  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:_TimeTopologyPrimitive" minOccurs="0"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <!--  ======= TimeNode ======= --> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <element name="TimeNode" type="gml:TimeNodeType" substitutionGroup="gml:_TimeTopologyPrimitive"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation xml:lang="en">"TimeNode" is a zero dimensional temporal topology primitive,  
   expresses a position in topological time, and is a start and an end of time edge, which represents states of time. 
   Time node may be isolated. However, it cannot describe the ordering relationships with other primitives.  
   An isolated node may not be an element of any temporal topology complex. 
   </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="TimeNodeType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation xml:lang="en">Type declaration of the element "TimeNode".  
</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractTimeTopologyPrimitiveType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element name="previousEdge" type="gml:TimeEdgePropertyType" minOccurs="0" 
maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element name="nextEdge" type="gml:TimeEdgePropertyType" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element name="position" type="gml:TimeInstantPropertyType" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="TimeNodePropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A time node property can either be any time node element encapsulated in an element of this type  
   or an XLink reference to a remote time node element (where remote includes elements located elsewhere in the 
same document).  
   Note that either the reference or the contained element must be given, but not both or none. 
   </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:TimeNode" minOccurs="0"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <!--  ======= TimeEdge ======= --> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <element name="TimeEdge" type="gml:TimeEdgeType" substitutionGroup="gml:_TimeTopologyPrimitive"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation xml:lang="en">TimeEdge is one dimensional temporal topology primitive, 
    expresses a state in topological time. It has an orientation from its start toward the end,  
    and its boundaries shall associate with two different time nodes. 
    </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="TimeEdgeType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation xml:lang="en">Type declaration of the element "TimeEdge".  
   </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractTimeTopologyPrimitiveType"> 
    <sequence> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


416  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


     <element name="start" type="gml:TimeNodePropertyType"/> 
     <element name="end" type="gml:TimeNodePropertyType"/> 
     <element name="extent" type="gml:TimePeriodPropertyType" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="TimeEdgePropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A time edge property can either be any time edge element encapsulated in an element of this type  
   or an XLink reference to a remote time edge element (where remote includes elements located elsewhere in the 
same document).  
   Note that either the reference or the contained element must be given, but not both or none. 
   </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:TimeEdge" minOccurs="0"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <!-- ===       Succession        === --> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
 <simpleType name="SuccessionType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Feature succession is a semantic relationship derived from evaluation of observer, and  
   Feature Substitution, Feature Division and Feature Fusion are defined as associations between  
   previous features and next features in the temporal context.  
   Successions shall be represented in either following two ways.  
   * define a temporal topological complex element as a feature element  
   * define an association same as temporal topological complex between features.  
   </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <restriction base="string"> 
   <enumeration value="substitution"/> 
   <enumeration value="division"/> 
   <enumeration value="fusion"/> 
   <enumeration value="initiation"/> 
  </restriction> 
 </simpleType> 
 <!-- ================================================================== --> 
</schema> 


C.27 topology.xsd 


<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
<schema targetNamespace="http://www.opengis.net/gml" xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink" 
xmlns:gml="http://www.opengis.net/gml" xmlns:sch="http://www.ascc.net/xml/schematron" 
xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" elementFormDefault="qualified" version="3.1.0"> 
 <annotation> 
  <appinfo source="urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-xsd:topology:v3.1.0">topology.xsd</appinfo> 
  <documentation> 
    </documentation> 
 </annotation> 
 <include schemaLocation="geometryComplexes.xsd"/> 
 <!-- ============================================================== 
       abstract supertype for topology objects 
        =============================================================== --> 
 <!-- ========================================================== --> 
 <element name="_Topology" type="gml:AbstractTopologyType" abstract="true" substitutionGroup="gml:_Object"/> 
 <!-- ========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="AbstractTopologyType" abstract="true"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGMLType"/> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ========================================================== --> 
 <element name="_TopoPrimitive" type="gml:AbstractTopoPrimitiveType" abstract="true" 
substitutionGroup="gml:_Topology"> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 417 
 


 


  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Substitution group branch for Topo Primitives, used by 
TopoPrimitiveArrayAssociationType</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- ========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="AbstractTopoPrimitiveType" abstract="true"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractTopologyType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:isolated" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:container" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ========================================================== --> 
 <element name="isolated" type="gml:IsolatedPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <appinfo> 
    <sch:pattern> 
     <sch:rule context="gml:isolated"> 
      <sch:extends rule="hrefOrContent"/> 
     </sch:rule> 
    </sch:pattern> 
   </appinfo> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- ========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="IsolatedPropertyType"> 
  <choice minOccurs="0"> 
   <element ref="gml:Node"/> 
   <element ref="gml:Edge"/> 
  </choice> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ========================================================== --> 
 <element name="container" type="gml:ContainerPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <appinfo> 
    <sch:pattern> 
     <sch:rule context="gml:containerProperty"> 
      <sch:extends rule="hrefOrContent"/> 
     </sch:rule> 
    </sch:pattern> 
   </appinfo> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- ========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="ContainerPropertyType"> 
  <choice minOccurs="0"> 
   <element ref="gml:Face"/> 
   <element ref="gml:TopoSolid"/> 
  </choice> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <!-- primitive topology objects --> 
 <!-- ========================================================== --> 
 <element name="Node" type="gml:NodeType" substitutionGroup="gml:_TopoPrimitive"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="NodeType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> Its optional co-boundary is a set of connected directedEdges.  The orientation of one of these 
dirEdges is "+" if the Node is the "to" node of the Edge, and "-" if it is the "from" node. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractTopoPrimitiveType"> 
    <sequence> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


418  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


     <element ref="gml:directedEdge" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:pointProperty" minOccurs="0"/> 
     <!-- <element name="geometry" type="gml:PointPropertyType" minOccurs="0"/> --> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ===== Property for topology association - by Value or by Reference ===== --> 
 <element name="directedNode" type="gml:DirectedNodePropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <appinfo> 
    <sch:pattern> 
     <sch:rule context="gml:directedNode"> 
      <sch:extends rule="hrefOrContent"/> 
     </sch:rule> 
    </sch:pattern> 
   </appinfo> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="DirectedNodePropertyType"> 
  <choice> 
   <element ref="gml:Node" minOccurs="0"/> 
  </choice> 
  <attribute name="orientation" type="gml:SignType" default="+"/> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ========================================================== --> 
 <!-- primitive topology objects (1-dimensional) --> 
 <!-- ========================================================== --> 
 <element name="Edge" type="gml:EdgeType" substitutionGroup="gml:_TopoPrimitive"/> 
 <!-- ========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="EdgeType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>There is precisely one positively directed and one negatively directed node in the boundary of every 
edge. The negatively and positively directed nodes correspond to the start and end nodes respectively. The optional coboundary 
of an edge is a circular sequence of directed faces which are incident on this edge in document order. Faces which use a 
particular boundary edge in its positive orientation appear with positive orientation on the coboundary of the same edge. In the 2D 
case, the orientation of the face on the left of the edge is "+"; the orientation of the face on the right on its right is "-". An edge may 
optionally be realised by a 1-dimensional (curve) geometric primitive.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractTopoPrimitiveType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:directedNode" minOccurs="2" maxOccurs="2"/> 
     <element ref="gml:directedFace" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:curveProperty" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ===== Property for topology association - by Value or by Reference ===== --> 
 <element name="directedEdge" type="gml:DirectedEdgePropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <appinfo> 
    <sch:pattern> 
     <sch:rule context="gml:directedEdge"> 
      <sch:extends rule="hrefOrContent"/> 
     </sch:rule> 
    </sch:pattern> 
   </appinfo> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="DirectedEdgePropertyType"> 
  <choice> 
   <element ref="gml:Edge" minOccurs="0"/> 
  </choice> 
  <attribute name="orientation" type="gml:SignType" default="+"/> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
 </complexType> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 419 
 


 


 <!-- ========================================================== --> 
 <!-- primitive topology objects (2-dimensional) --> 
 <!-- ========================================================== --> 
 <element name="Face" type="gml:FaceType" substitutionGroup="gml:_TopoPrimitive"/> 
 <!-- ========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="FaceType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>. The topological boundary of a face consists of a set of directed edges. Note that all edges 
associated with a Face, including dangling and interior edges, appear in the boundary.  Dangling and interior edges are each 
referenced by pairs of directedEdges with opposing orientations.  The optional coboundary of a face is a pair of directed solids 
which are bounded by this face. If present, there is precisely one positively directed and one negatively directed solid in the 
coboundary of every face. The positively directed solid corresponds to the solid which lies in the direction of the positively 
directed normal to the face in any geometric realisation.  A face may optionally be realised by a 2-dimensional (surface) 
geometric primitive.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractTopoPrimitiveType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:directedEdge" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:directedTopoSolid" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="2"/> 
     <element ref="gml:surfaceProperty" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ===== Property for topology association - by Value or by Reference ===== --> 
 <element name="directedFace" type="gml:DirectedFacePropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <appinfo> 
    <sch:pattern> 
     <sch:rule context="gml:directedFace"> 
      <sch:extends rule="hrefOrContent"/> 
     </sch:rule> 
    </sch:pattern> 
   </appinfo> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="DirectedFacePropertyType"> 
  <choice> 
   <element ref="gml:Face" minOccurs="0"/> 
  </choice> 
  <attribute name="orientation" type="gml:SignType" default="+"/> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ========================================================== --> 
 <!-- primitive topology objects (3-dimensional) --> 
 <!-- ========================================================== --> 
 <element name="TopoSolid" type="gml:TopoSolidType" substitutionGroup="gml:_TopoPrimitive"/> 
 <!-- ============================================================= --> 
 <complexType name="TopoSolidType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>The topological boundary of a TopoSolid consists of a set of directed faces. Note that all faces 
associated with the TopoSolid, including dangling faces, appear in the boundary. The coboundary of a TopoSolid is empty and 
hence requires no representation.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractTopoPrimitiveType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:directedFace" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ========================================================== --> 
 <!-- ===== Property for topology association - by Value or by Reference ===== --> 
 <element name="directedTopoSolid" type="gml:DirectedTopoSolidPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <appinfo> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


420  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


    <sch:pattern> 
     <sch:rule context="gml:directedTopoSolid"> 
      <sch:extends rule="hrefOrContent"/> 
     </sch:rule> 
    </sch:pattern> 
   </appinfo> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- ============================================================= --> 
 <complexType name="DirectedTopoSolidPropertyType"> 
  <choice> 
   <element ref="gml:TopoSolid"/> 
  </choice> 
  <attribute name="orientation" type="gml:SignType" default="+"/> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ========================================================== --> 
 <element name="TopoPoint" type="gml:TopoPointType"/> 
 <!-- ========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="TopoPointType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>The intended use of TopoPoint is to appear within a point feature to express the structural and 
possibly geometric relationships of this point to other features via shared node definitions. Note the orientation assigned to the 
directedNode has no meaning in this context. It is preserved for symmetry with the types and elements which 
follow.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractTopologyType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:directedNode"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ========================================================== --> 
 <!-- ============================================================= --> 
 <!-- ===== Property for topology association - by Value  ===== --> 
 <element name="topoPointProperty" type="gml:TopoPointPropertyType"/> 
 <!-- ============================================================= --> 
 <complexType name="TopoPointPropertyType"> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:TopoPoint"/> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ========================================================== --> 
 <!-- ========================================================== --> 
 <element name="TopoCurve" type="gml:TopoCurveType"/> 
 <!-- ============================================================= --> 
 <complexType name="TopoCurveType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> The end Node of each directedEdge of a TopoCurveType 
is the start Node of the next directedEdge of the TopoCurveType in document order.  The TopoCurve type and element represent 
a homogeneous topological expression, a list of directed edges, which if realised are isomorphic to a geometric curve primitive. 
The intended use of TopoCurve is to appear within a line feature instance to express the structural and geometric relationships of 
this line to other features via the shared edge definitions.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractTopologyType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:directedEdge" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ========================================================== --> 
 <!-- ===== Property for topology association - by Value ===== --> 
 <element name="topoCurveProperty" type="gml:TopoCurvePropertyType"/> 
 <!-- ============================================================= --> 
 <complexType name="TopoCurvePropertyType"> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:TopoCurve"/> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 421 
 


 


  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ========================================================== --> 
 <!-- ========================================================== --> 
 <element name="TopoSurface" type="gml:TopoSurfaceType"/> 
 <!-- ============================================================= --> 
 <complexType name="TopoSurfaceType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>The TopoSurface type and element represent a homogeneous topological expression, a set of 
directed faces, which if realised are isomorphic to a geometric surface primitive. The intended use of TopoSurface is to appear 
within a surface feature instance to express the structural and possibly geometric relationships of this surface to other features via 
the shared face definitions.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractTopologyType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:directedFace" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ========================================================== --> 
 <!-- ===== Property for topology association - by Value ===== --> 
 <element name="topoSurfaceProperty" type="gml:TopoSurfacePropertyType"/> 
 <!-- ============================================================= --> 
 <complexType name="TopoSurfacePropertyType"> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:TopoSurface"/> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ========================================================== --> 
 <element name="TopoVolume" type="gml:TopoVolumeType"/> 
 <!-- ============================================================= --> 
 <complexType name="TopoVolumeType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>The TopoVolume type and element represent a homogeneous topological expression, a set of 
directed TopoSolids, which if realised are isomorphic to a geometric solid primitive. The intended use of TopoVolume is to appear 
within a 3D solid feature instance to express the structural and geometric relationships of this solid to other features via the 
shared TopoSolid definitions.  . Note the orientation assigned to the directedSolid has no meaning in three dimensions. It is 
preserved for symmetry with the preceding types and elements. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractTopologyType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:directedTopoSolid" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ========================================================== --> 
 <!-- ===== Property for topology association - by Value  ===== --> 
 <element name="topoVolumeProperty" type="gml:TopoVolumePropertyType"/> 
 <!-- ============================================================= --> 
 <complexType name="TopoVolumePropertyType"> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:TopoVolume"/> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ========================================================== --> 
 <!-- ========================================================== --> 
 <element name="TopoComplex" type="gml:TopoComplexType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Topology"/> 
 <!-- ========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="TopoComplexType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>This type represents a TP_Complex capable of holding topological primitives.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractTopologyType"> 
    <sequence> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


422  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


     <element ref="gml:maximalComplex"/> 
     <element ref="gml:superComplex" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:subComplex" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:topoPrimitiveMember" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:topoPrimitiveMembers" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
    <attribute name="isMaximal" type="boolean" default="false"/> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ===== Property for topology association - by Value or Reference ===== --> 
 <element name="topoComplexProperty" type="gml:TopoComplexMemberType"/> 
 <!-- ========================================================== --> 
 <element name="subComplex" type="gml:TopoComplexMemberType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <appinfo> 
    <sch:pattern> 
     <sch:rule context="gml:subComplex"> 
      <sch:extends rule="hrefOrContent"/> 
     </sch:rule> 
    </sch:pattern> 
   </appinfo> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- ========================================================== --> 
 <element name="superComplex" type="gml:TopoComplexMemberType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <appinfo> 
    <sch:pattern> 
     <sch:rule context="gml:superComplex"> 
      <sch:extends rule="hrefOrContent"/> 
     </sch:rule> 
    </sch:pattern> 
   </appinfo> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- ========================================================== --> 
 <element name="maximalComplex" type="gml:TopoComplexMemberType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <appinfo> 
    <sch:pattern> 
     <sch:rule context="gml:subComplex"> 
      <sch:extends rule="hrefOrContent"/> 
     </sch:rule> 
    </sch:pattern> 
   </appinfo> 
   <documentation>Need schamatron test here that isMaximal attribute value is true</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- ============================================================= --> 
 <complexType name="TopoComplexMemberType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>This Property can be used to embed a TopoComplex in a feature collection.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:TopoComplex" minOccurs="0"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ========================================================== --> 
 <!-- ===== Property for topology association - by Value or Reference ===== --> 
 <element name="topoPrimitiveMember" type="gml:topoPrimitiveMemberType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <appinfo> 
    <sch:pattern> 
     <sch:rule context="gml:topoPrimitiveMember"> 
      <sch:extends rule="hrefOrContent"/> 
     </sch:rule> 
    </sch:pattern> 
   </appinfo> 
  </annotation> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 423 
 


 


 </element> 
 <!-- ============================================================= --> 
 <complexType name="topoPrimitiveMemberType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>This type supports embedding topological primitives in a TopoComplex.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="gml:_TopoPrimitive" minOccurs="0"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ========================================================== --> 
 <!-- ===== Property for topology association - by Value ===== --> 
 <element name="topoPrimitiveMembers" type="gml:TopoPrimitiveArrayAssociationType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <appinfo> 
    <sch:pattern> 
     <sch:rule context="gml:topoPrimitiveMember"> 
      <sch:extends rule="hrefOrContent"/> 
     </sch:rule> 
    </sch:pattern> 
   </appinfo> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- ========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="TopoPrimitiveArrayAssociationType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>This type supports embedding an array of topological primitives in a 
TopoComplex</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:ArrayAssociationType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:_TopoPrimitive" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ========================================================== --> 
</schema> 


C.28 units.xsd 


<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
<schema targetNamespace="http://www.opengis.net/gml" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" 
xmlns:gml="http://www.opengis.net/gml" elementFormDefault="qualified" version="3.00" xml:lang="en"> 
 <annotation> 
  <appinfo source="urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-units:v3.00"/> 
  <documentation> 
   <name>units.xsd</name> 
   <version>3.0</version> 
   <scope>How to encode units of measure (or uom) for numerical values. </scope> 
   <description>Builds on gmlBase.xsd to encode units of measure (or uom), including definitions of units of measure 
and dictionaries of such definitions. GML 3.0 candidate schema, primary editor: Arliss Whiteside. Last updated 2002/11/13. 
</description> 
   <copyright>Copyright (c) 2001-2002 OpenGIS, All Rights Reserved.</copyright> 
   <conformance>Parts of this schema are based on Subclause 6.5.7 of ISO/CD 19103 Geographic information - 
Conceptual schema language, on Subclause A.5.2.2.3 of ISO/CD 19118 Geographic information - Encoding, and on most of 
OpenGIS Recommendation Paper OGC 02-007r4 Units of Measure Use and Definition Recommendations. </conformance> 
  </documentation> 
 </annotation> 
 <!-- ============================================================== 
       includes and imports 
 ============================================================== --> 
 <include schemaLocation="dictionary.xsd"/> 
 <!-- ============================================================== 
       elements and types 
 ============================================================== --> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


424  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 <element name="unitOfMeasure" type="gml:UnitOfMeasureType"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="UnitOfMeasureType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Reference to a unit of measure definition that applies to all the numerical values described by the 
element containing this element. Notice that a complexType which needs to include the uom attribute can do so by extending this 
complexType. Alternately, this complexType can be used as a pattern for a new complexType. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence/> 
  <attribute name="uom" type="anyURI" use="required"> 
   <annotation> 
    <documentation>Reference to a unit of measure definition, usually within the same XML document but possibly 
outside the XML document which contains this reference. For a reference within the same XML document, the "#" symbol should 
be used, followed by a text abbreviation of the unit name. However, the "#" symbol may be optional, and still may be interpreted 
as a reference. </documentation> 
   </annotation> 
  </attribute> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="UnitDefinition" type="gml:UnitDefinitionType" substitutionGroup="gml:Definition"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="UnitDefinitionType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Definition of a unit of measure (or uom). The definition includes a quantityType property, which 
indicates the phenomenon to which the units apply, and a catalogSymbol, which gives the short symbol used for this unit. This 
element is used when the relationship of this unit to other units or units systems is unknown.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:DefinitionType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:quantityType"/> 
     <element ref="gml:catalogSymbol" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="BaseUnit" type="gml:BaseUnitType" substitutionGroup="gml:UnitDefinition"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="BaseUnitType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Definition of a unit of measure which is a base unit from the system of units.  A base unit cannot be 
derived by combination of other base units within this system.  Sometimes known as "fundamental unit".  </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:UnitDefinitionType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element name="unitsSystem" type="gml:ReferenceType"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="DerivedUnit" type="gml:DerivedUnitType" substitutionGroup="gml:UnitDefinition"/> 
 <!-- ============================================================ --> 
 <complexType name="DerivedUnitType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Definition of a unit of measure which is defined through algebraic combination of more primitive 
units, which are usually base units from a particular system of units. Derived units based directly on base units are usually 
preferred for quantities other than the base units or fundamental quantities within a system.  If a derived unit is not the preferred 
unit, the ConventionalUnit element should be used instead.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:UnitDefinitionType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:derivationUnitTerm" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 425 
 


 


 <element name="ConventionalUnit" type="gml:ConventionalUnitType" substitutionGroup="gml:UnitDefinition"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="ConventionalUnitType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Definition of a unit of measure which is related to a preferred unit for this quantity type through a 
conversion formula.  A method for deriving this unit by algebraic combination of more primitive units, may also be provided.  
</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:UnitDefinitionType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <choice> 
      <element ref="gml:conversionToPreferredUnit"/> 
      <element ref="gml:roughConversionToPreferredUnit"/> 
     </choice> 
     <element ref="gml:derivationUnitTerm" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="quantityType" type="gml:StringOrRefType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Informal description of the phenomenon or type of quantity that is measured or observed. For 
example, "length", "angle", "time", "pressure", or "temperature". When the quantity is the result of an observation or 
measurement, this term is known as Observable Type or Measurand. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="catalogSymbol" type="gml:CodeType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>For global understanding of a unit of measure, it is often possible to reference an item in a catalog 
of units, using a symbol in that catalog. The "codeSpace" attribute in "CodeType" identifies a namespace for the catalog symbol 
value, and might reference the catalog. The "string" value in "CodeType" contains the value of a symbol that is unique within this 
catalog namespace. This symbol often appears explicitly in the catalog, but it could be a combination of symbols using a specified 
algebra of units. For example, the symbol "cm" might indicate that it is the "m" symbol combined with the "c" prefix. 
</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="derivationUnitTerm" type="gml:DerivationUnitTermType"/> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="DerivationUnitTermType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Definition of one unit term for a derived unit of measure. This unit term references another unit of 
measure (uom) and provides an integer exponent applied to that unit in defining the compound unit. The exponent can be positive 
or negative, but not zero. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:UnitOfMeasureType"> 
    <attribute name="exponent" type="integer"/> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="conversionToPreferredUnit" type="gml:ConversionToPreferredUnitType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>This element is included when this unit has an accurate conversion to the preferred unit for this 
quantity type. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <element name="roughConversionToPreferredUnit" type="gml:ConversionToPreferredUnitType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>This element is included when the correct definition of this unit is unknown, but this unit has a rough 
or inaccurate conversion to the preferred unit for this quantity type. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


426  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 <complexType name="ConversionToPreferredUnitType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Relation of a unit to the preferred unit for this quantity type, specified by an arithmetic conversion 
(scaling and/or offset). A preferred unit is either a base unit or a derived unit selected for all units of one quantity type. The 
mandatory attribute "uom" shall reference the preferred unit that this conversion applies to. The conversion is specified by one of 
two alternative elements: "factor" or "formula". </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:UnitOfMeasureType"> 
    <choice> 
     <element name="factor" type="double"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>Specification of the scale factor by which a value using this unit of measure can be 
multiplied to obtain the corresponding value using the preferred unit of measure. </documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
     <element name="formula" type="gml:FormulaType"> 
      <annotation> 
       <documentation>Specification of the formula by which a value using this unit of measure can be 
converted to obtain the corresponding value using the preferred unit of measure. </documentation> 
      </annotation> 
     </element> 
    </choice> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="FormulaType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Paremeters of a simple formula by which a value using this unit of measure can be converted to the 
corresponding value using the preferred unit of measure. The formula element contains elements a, b, c and d, whose values use 
the XML Schema type "double". These values are used in the formula y = (a + bx) / (c + dx), where x is a value using this unit, 
and y is the corresponding value using the preferred unit. The elements a and d are optional, and if values are not provided, 
those parameters are considered to be zero. If values are not provided for both a and d, the formula is equivalent to a fraction 
with numerator and denominator parameters. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <element name="a" type="double" minOccurs="0"/> 
   <element name="b" type="double"/> 
   <element name="c" type="double"/> 
   <element name="d" type="double" minOccurs="0"/> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
</schema> 


C.29 valueObjects.xsd 


<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
<schema targetNamespace="http://www.opengis.net/gml" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" 
xmlns:sch="http://www.ascc.net/xml/schematron" xmlns:gml="http://www.opengis.net/gml" 
xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink" elementFormDefault="qualified" attributeFormDefault="unqualified" version="3.1.0"> 
 <annotation> 
  <appinfo source="urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-xsd:valueObjects:v3.1.0">valueObjects.xsd</appinfo> 
  <documentation>     Copyright (c) 2002 OGC, All Rights Reserved.  GML conformant schema for Values in which the  * 
scalar Value types and lists have their values recorded in simpleContent elements * complex Value types are built recursively  
    </documentation> 
 </annotation> 
 <!-- ====================================================================== --> 
 <!-- geometry and temporal included so that _Geometry and _TimeObject can be added to Value choice group --> 
 <include schemaLocation="geometryBasic0d1d.xsd"/> 
 <include schemaLocation="temporal.xsd"/> 
 <!-- ====================================================================== --> 
 <group name="Value"> 
  <choice> 
   <element ref="gml:_Value"/> 
   <element ref="gml:_Geometry"/> 
   <element ref="gml:_TimeObject"/> 
   <element ref="gml:Null"/> 
   <element ref="gml:measure"/> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 427 
 


 


  </choice> 
  <!--   <xs:documentation>       <xs:annotation>Utility choice group which unifies generic Values defined in this schema 
document with Geometry and Temporal objects and the Measures described above, so that any of these may be used within 
aggregate Values.     </xs:annotation>     </xs:documentation> --> 
 </group> 
 <!-- ====================================================================== --> 
 <element name="_Value" abstract="true" substitutionGroup="gml:_Object"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Abstract element which acts as the head of a substitution group which contains _ScalarValue, 
_ScalarValueList and CompositeValue and (transitively) the elements in their substitution groups.  This element may be used in 
an application schema as a variable, so that in an XML instance document any member of its substitution group may occur.  
</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- ====================================================================== --> 
 <!-- ================== Scalar Values ========================= --> 
 <element name="_ScalarValue" abstract="true" substitutionGroup="gml:_Value"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Abstract element which acts as the head of a substitution group which contains Boolean, Category, 
Count and Quantity, and (transitively) the elements in their substitution groups.  This element may be used in an application 
schema as a variable, so that in an XML instance document any member of its substitution group may occur.  </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- ====================================================================== --> 
 <element name="_ScalarValueList" abstract="true" substitutionGroup="gml:_Value"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Abstract element which acts as the head of a substitution group which contains the compact 
encodings BooleanList, CategoryList, CountList and QuantityList, and (transitively) the elements in their substitution groups.  This 
element may be used in an application schema as a variable, so that in an XML instance document any member of its 
substitution group may occur.  </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- ====================================================================== --> 
 <!-- ======================= Boolean ======================== --> 
 <element name="Boolean" type="boolean" substitutionGroup="gml:_ScalarValue"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A value from two-valued logic, using the XML Schema boolean type.  An instance may take the 
values {true, false, 1, 0}.  </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <element name="BooleanList" type="gml:booleanOrNullList" substitutionGroup="gml:_ScalarValueList"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>XML List based on XML Schema boolean type.  An element of this type contains a space-separated 
list of boolean values {0,1,true,false}</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- ====================================================================== --> 
 <!-- ======================= Category ========================== --> 
 <element name="Category" type="gml:CodeType" substitutionGroup="gml:_ScalarValue"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A term representing a classification.  It has an optional XML attribute codeSpace, whose value is a 
URI which identifies a dictionary, codelist or authority for the term.  </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <element name="CategoryList" type="gml:CodeOrNullListType" substitutionGroup="gml:_ScalarValueList"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A space-separated list of terms or nulls.  A single XML attribute codeSpace may be provided, which 
authorises all the terms in the list.    </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- ====================================================================== --> 
 <!-- =========================== Quantity ============================ --> 
 <element name="Quantity" type="gml:MeasureType" substitutionGroup="gml:_ScalarValue"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A numeric value with a scale.  The content of the element is an amount using the XML Schema type 
double which permits decimal or scientific notation.  An XML attribute uom (unit of measure) is required, whose value is a URI 
which identifies the definition of the scale or units by which the numeric value must be multiplied.  </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


428  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 <element name="QuantityList" type="gml:MeasureOrNullListType" substitutionGroup="gml:_ScalarValueList"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A space separated list of amounts or nulls.  The amounts use the XML Schema type double.  A 
single XML attribute uom (unit of measure) is required, whose value is a URI which identifies the definition of the scale or units 
by which all the amounts in the list must be multiplied.  </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- ====================================================================== --> 
 <!-- ========================== Count ========================== --> 
 <element name="Count" type="integer" substitutionGroup="gml:_ScalarValue"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>An integer representing a frequency of occurrence. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <element name="CountList" type="gml:integerOrNullList" substitutionGroup="gml:_ScalarValueList"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A space-separated list of integers or nulls.  </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- ====================================================================== --> 
 <!--                    aggregate Value types                      --> 
 <!-- ====================================================================== --> 
 <!-- ===================== ValueCollection ========================== --> 
 <complexType name="CompositeValueType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Aggregate value built from other Values using the Composite pattern. It contains zero or an arbitrary 
number of valueComponent elements, and zero or one valueComponents elements.  It may be used for strongly coupled 
aggregates (vectors, tensors) or for arbitrary collections of values.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractGMLType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:valueComponent" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
     <element ref="gml:valueComponents" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <element name="CompositeValue" type="gml:CompositeValueType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Value"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Aggregate value built using the Composite pattern.  </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- ====================================================================== --> 
 <!-- ========================= ValueArray ========================== --> 
 <complexType name="ValueArrayType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>A Value Array is used for homogeneous arrays of primitive and aggregate values.  The member 
values may be scalars, composites, arrays or lists.  ValueArray has the same content model as CompositeValue, but the member 
values must be homogeneous.  The element declaration contains a Schematron constraint which expresses this restriction 
precisely.            Since the members are homogeneous, the referenceSystem (uom, codeSpace) may be specified on the 
ValueArray itself and implicitly inherited by all the members if desired.    Note that a_ScalarValueList is preferred for arrays of 
Scalar Values since this is a more efficient encoding.  </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:CompositeValueType"> 
    <attributeGroup ref="gml:referenceSystem"/> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <element name="ValueArray" type="gml:ValueArrayType" substitutionGroup="gml:CompositeValue"> 
  <annotation> 
   <appinfo> 
    <sch:pattern name="Check either codeSpace or uom not both"> 
     <sch:rule context="gml:ValueArray"> 
      <sch:report test="@codeSpace and @uom">ValueArray may not carry both a reference to a codeSpace 
and a uom</sch:report> 
     </sch:rule> 
    </sch:pattern> 
    <sch:pattern name="Check components are homogeneous"> 
     <sch:rule context="gml:ValueArray"> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 429 
 


 


      <sch:assert test="count(gml:valueComponent/*) = count(gml:valueComponent/*[name() = 
name(../../gml:valueComponent[1]/*[1])])">All components of <sch:name/> must be of the same type</sch:assert> 
      <sch:assert test="count(gml:valueComponents/*) = count(gml:valueComponents/*[name() = 
name(../*[1])])">All components of <sch:name/> must be of the same type</sch:assert> 
     </sch:rule> 
    </sch:pattern> 
   </appinfo> 
   <documentation>A Value Array is used for homogeneous arrays of primitive and aggregate values.   
_ScalarValueList is preferred for arrays of Scalar Values since this is more efficient.  Since "choice" is not available for attribute 
groups, an external constraint (e.g. Schematron) would be required to enforce the selection of only one of these through schema 
validation </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- attribute group required for ValueArray --> 
 <attributeGroup name="referenceSystem"> 
  <attribute name="codeSpace" type="anyURI" use="optional"/> 
  <attribute name="uom" type="anyURI" use="optional"/> 
 </attributeGroup> 
 <!-- ====================================================================== --> 
 <!-- ====================== Typed ValueExtents ============================ --> 
 <element name="QuantityExtent" type="gml:QuantityExtentType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Value"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Utility element to store a 2-point range of numeric values. If one member is a null, then this is a 
single ended interval. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- --> 
 <complexType name="QuantityExtentType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Restriction of list type to store a 2-point range of numeric values. If one member is a null, then this is 
a single ended interval. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <simpleContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:MeasureOrNullListType"> 
    <length value="2"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </simpleContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ====================================================================== --> 
 <element name="CategoryExtent" type="gml:CategoryExtentType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Value"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Utility element to store a 2-point range of ordinal values. If one member is a null, then this is a single 
ended interval. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- --> 
 <complexType name="CategoryExtentType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Restriction of list type to store a 2-point range of ordinal values. If one member is a null, then this is 
a single ended interval. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <simpleContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:CodeOrNullListType"> 
    <length value="2"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </simpleContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ====================================================================== --> 
 <element name="CountExtent" type="gml:CountExtentType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Value"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Utility element to store a 2-point range of frequency values. If one member is a null, then this is a 
single ended interval. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- --> 
 <simpleType name="CountExtentType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Restriction of list type to store a 2-point range of frequency values. If one member is a null, then this 
is a single ended interval. </documentation> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


430  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


  </annotation> 
  <restriction base="gml:integerOrNullList"> 
   <length value="2"/> 
  </restriction> 
 </simpleType> 
 <!-- ====================================================================== --> 
 <!-- ===================== pieces needed for compositing ==================== --> 
 <element name="valueProperty" type="gml:ValuePropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Element which refers to, or contains, a Value</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- ====================================================================== --> 
 <element name="valueComponent" type="gml:ValuePropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Element which refers to, or contains, a Value.  This version is used in CompositeValues.  
</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- ====================================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="ValuePropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>GML property which refers to, or contains, a Value</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <group ref="gml:Value" minOccurs="0"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ====================================================================== --> 
 <!-- ====================================================================== --> 
 <element name="valueComponents" type="gml:ValueArrayPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Element which refers to, or contains, a set of homogeneously typed Values. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 <!-- ====================================================================== --> 
 <complexType name="ValueArrayPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>GML property which refers to, or contains, a set of homogeneously typed Values. </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <sequence> 
   <group ref="gml:Value" maxOccurs="unbounded"/> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ====================== utility typed valueProperty types ===================  --> 
 <complexType name="ScalarValuePropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Property whose content is a scalar value.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:ValuePropertyType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:_ScalarValue" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <complexType name="BooleanPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Property whose content is a Boolean value.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:ValuePropertyType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:Boolean" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <complexType name="CategoryPropertyType"> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 431 
 


 


  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Property whose content is a Category.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:ValuePropertyType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:Category" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <complexType name="QuantityPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Property whose content is a Quantity.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:ValuePropertyType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:Quantity" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <complexType name="CountPropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>Property whose content is a Count.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <complexContent> 
   <restriction base="gml:ValuePropertyType"> 
    <sequence> 
     <element ref="gml:Count" minOccurs="0"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </restriction> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ====================================================================== --> 
</schema> 


C.30 xlink.xsd 


<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
<!-- File: xlinks.xsd  --> 
<schema targetNamespace="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink" xmlns:xsd="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" 
xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink" version="2.0"> 
 <annotation> 
  <appinfo source="urn:opengis:specification:gml:schema-xlinks:v3.0c2">xlinks.xsd v3.0b2 2001-07</appinfo> 
  <documentation> 
   GML 3.0 candidate xlinks schema. Copyright (c) 2001 OGC, All Rights Reserved. 
  </documentation> 
 </annotation> 
 <!-- ============================================================== 
       global declarations 
   =============================================================== --> 
 <!-- locator attribute --> 
 <attribute name="href" type="anyURI"/> 
 <!-- semantic attributes --> 
 <attribute name="role" type="anyURI"/> 
 <attribute name="arcrole" type="anyURI"/> 
 <attribute name="title" type="string"/> 
 <!-- behavior attributes --> 
 <attribute name="show"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> 
        The 'show' attribute is used to communicate the desired presentation  
        of the ending resource on traversal from the starting resource; it's  
        value should be treated as follows:  
        new - load ending resource in a new window, frame, pane, or other  
              presentation context 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


432  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


        replace - load the resource in the same window, frame, pane, or  
                  other presentation context 
        embed - load ending resource in place of the presentation of the  
                starting resource 
        other - behavior is unconstrained; examine other markup in the  
                link for hints  
        none - behavior is unconstrained  
      </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <simpleType> 
   <restriction base="string"> 
    <enumeration value="new"/> 
    <enumeration value="replace"/> 
    <enumeration value="embed"/> 
    <enumeration value="other"/> 
    <enumeration value="none"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </simpleType> 
 </attribute> 
 <attribute name="actuate"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation> 
        The 'actuate' attribute is used to communicate the desired timing  
        of traversal from the starting resource to the ending resource;  
        it's value should be treated as follows: 
        onLoad - traverse to the ending resource immediately on loading  
                 the starting resource  
        onRequest - traverse from the starting resource to the ending  
                    resource only on a post-loading event triggered for  
                    this purpose  
        other - behavior is unconstrained; examine other markup in link  
                for hints  
        none - behavior is unconstrained 
      </documentation> 
  </annotation> 
  <simpleType> 
   <restriction base="string"> 
    <enumeration value="onLoad"/> 
    <enumeration value="onRequest"/> 
    <enumeration value="other"/> 
    <enumeration value="none"/> 
   </restriction> 
  </simpleType> 
 </attribute> 
 <!-- traversal attributes --> 
 <attribute name="label" type="string"/> 
 <attribute name="from" type="string"/> 
 <attribute name="to" type="string"/> 
 <!-- ============================================================== 
       Attributes grouped by XLink type, as specified in the W3C  
       Proposed Recommendation (dated 2000-12-20) 
 ============================================================== --> 
 <attributeGroup name="simpleLink"> 
  <attribute name="type" type="string" fixed="simple" form="qualified"/> 
  <attribute ref="xlink:href" use="optional"/> 
  <attribute ref="xlink:role" use="optional"/> 
  <attribute ref="xlink:arcrole" use="optional"/> 
  <attribute ref="xlink:title" use="optional"/> 
  <attribute ref="xlink:show" use="optional"/> 
  <attribute ref="xlink:actuate" use="optional"/> 
 </attributeGroup> 
 <attributeGroup name="extendedLink"> 
  <attribute name="type" type="string" fixed="extended" form="qualified"/> 
  <attribute ref="xlink:role" use="optional"/> 
  <attribute ref="xlink:title" use="optional"/> 
 </attributeGroup> 
 <attributeGroup name="locatorLink"> 
  <attribute name="type" type="string" fixed="locator" form="qualified"/> 
  <attribute ref="xlink:href" use="required"/> 
  <attribute ref="xlink:role" use="optional"/> 
  <attribute ref="xlink:title" use="optional"/> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 433 
 


 


  <attribute ref="xlink:label" use="optional"/> 
 </attributeGroup> 
 <attributeGroup name="arcLink"> 
  <attribute name="type" type="string" fixed="arc" form="qualified"/> 
  <attribute ref="xlink:arcrole" use="optional"/> 
  <attribute ref="xlink:title" use="optional"/> 
  <attribute ref="xlink:show" use="optional"/> 
  <attribute ref="xlink:actuate" use="optional"/> 
  <attribute ref="xlink:from" use="optional"/> 
  <attribute ref="xlink:to" use="optional"/> 
 </attributeGroup> 
 <attributeGroup name="resourceLink"> 
  <attribute name="type" type="string" fixed="resource" form="qualified"/> 
  <attribute ref="xlink:role" use="optional"/> 
  <attribute ref="xlink:title" use="optional"/> 
  <attribute ref="xlink:label" use="optional"/> 
 </attributeGroup> 
 <attributeGroup name="titleLink"> 
  <attribute name="type" type="string" fixed="title" form="qualified"/> 
 </attributeGroup> 
 <attributeGroup name="emptyLink"> 
  <attribute name="type" type="string" fixed="none" form="qualified"/> 
 </attributeGroup> 
</schema> 
 
 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


434  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


Annex D 
(informative) 


 
ISO 19100 Profile and Application Schema of GML  


D.1 General Approach 


The approach taken by this standard is shown in the following diagram. The two main aspects are: 


 Clear documentation of the conceptual model of GML: The profile of the ISO 19100 harmonized 
model that is implemented by GML is documented as well as the extensions to this profile. 


 Support for application schema development either in UML or XML Schema: In order to achieve this 
two-way mapping between UML (i.e. ISO 19109 Application Schemas in UML) and XML Schema (i.e. 
GML Application Schemas in XML Schema) the constructs used in both representations have to be 
limited. While this reduces the expressiveness of the schema descriptions to some extent, this also 
reduces their complexity and may make it easier to implement them. 


NOTE While the mapping from UML to XML Schema is discussed in Annex A of ISO DIS 19118, the reverse 
mapping is not discussed in any other ISO 19100 standard.  


Figure 12  


D.2 Profile of the ISO 19100 Harmonized Model used by GML 


This section describes the profile of  the ISO 19100 Harmonized Model that is used by GML. The description 
is based on version 4.5 of the model. In the description of the class diagrams of the profile the relationship and 
mapping to the GML Schemas is discussed. 


GML Schemas
(XML Schema)


well-defined
mapping


GML Application Schema
(XML Schema)


GML Application Schema
Encoding Rules
(ISO 19136/18)


User-defined Application Schema
(UML using ISO 19103 and ISO 19109)


GML Extension to the profile
(UML using ISO 19103)


ISO 19107
profile


ISO 19108
profile ...


GML Schemas
(XML Schema)


well-defined
mapping


GML Application Schema
(XML Schema)


GML Application Schema
Encoding Rules
(ISO 19136/18)


User-defined Application Schema
(UML using ISO 19103 and ISO 19109)


GML Extension to the profile
(UML using ISO 19103)


ISO 19107
profile


ISO 19108
profile ...







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 435 
 


 


NOTE Two types of differences between the ISO 19100 harmonized model and GML have been identified in this 
process: 


 Differences in concepts. These shall be discussed, whether the difference is acceptable, GML is more 
appropriate or ISO 19100 is more appropriate. 


 In general the encoding rules discussed in Annex E are used also in the encoding of the GML 
Schemas. However, since the GML Schemas were mostly handcrafted they exploit more of the 
specific capabilities of the implementation environment, i.e. XML and XML Schema. Examples are a 
number of predefined basic types (simple or complex types with simple content) or the use of global 
elements also for properties that shall be made substitutable (e.g. to define aliases for deprecated 
property names). These cases are documented in the following clauses or are straightforward.  


Only elements from packages discussed below are part of the profile. All other elements are not part of the 
profile2.  


Due to the nature of GML no operation of any class is part of the profile. 


In addition, interface classes (stereotype <<Interface>>) without data structures and Realization 
relationships to classes without data structures have been deleted. 


Furthermore, the navigability of associations has been restricted to the directions in which GML represents 
explicit object properties (most associations in the GML Schemas are navigable only in a single direction). 


NOTE 1 All deprecated types, elements and attributes of GML are not considered in this annex. 


NOTE 2 The general rules for the UML-to-XML-Schema mapping for GML Application Schemas is defined in Annex E. 


NOTE 3 In this annex the namespace "xsd:" is used to refer to the namespace of XML Schema, which is 
"http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema". The namespace gml: refers to the namespace of GML, which is 
http://www.opengis.net/gml. 


D.2.1 ISO 19103 Conceptual Schema Language 


In this section we define the basic types defined in ISO PDTS 19103 that are directly available in GML. In 
many cases simple types defined by XML Schema are used directly. 


  CharacterString is implemented by xsd:string. The character encoding is defined in the processing 
instruction of the XML document (the default for XML documents is UTF-8). 


 Date is implemented by xsd:date. DatePrecision is not supported. 


 DateTime is implemented by xsd:dateTime. Again, DatePrecision is not supported. 


 Time is implemented by xsd:time.  


  Real is implemented by xsd:double. 


 Decimal is in general implemented by xsd:decimal. For practical reasons, often decimal values will also 
be represented in schemas by xsd:double. 


 The generic basic type Number is in general implemented in GML Schemas by xsd:double. 


 Integer is implemented by xsd:integer. 


                                                      


2  The deleted packages are: ISO 19110, ISO 19112, ISO 19116, ISO 19117, ISO 19118, ISO 19119, ISO 19128, ISO 
19133, ISO 19134, ISO GDF, ISO 00639 Human Language, all informative packages, New. 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


436  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 Boolean is implemented by xsd:boolean. 


 Measure is implemented by the simple type gml:MeasureType. The value is of type xsd:double, the 
uom-specifier is implemented by a URI to a <gml:UnitDefinition> element. The following subtypes are 
implemented by GML, each pointing to a corresponding unit definition (measure.xsd): 


 Length  gml:LengthType 


 Scale  gml:ScaleType 


 Area  gml:AreaType 


 Volume  gml:VolumeType 


 Velocity  gml:SpeedType  
NOTE This terminology is incorrect in ISO 19103:  velocity is a vector quantity, so may only be described by a single 
component when operating within a 1-D coordinate system. 


 Time  gml:TimeType 


 Angle  gml:AngleType 


 Vector is implemented by gml:VectorType. 


 GenericName, LocalName and ScopedName are implemented by gml:CodeType where the name 
space designator is a URI. 


 Measure is implemented by gml:MeasureType, the uom-attribute is a URI pointing to the unit definition. 


 UnitOfMeasure is implemented by gml:UnitDefinitionType. 
 


ISO PDTS 19103 specifies that all NULL values are equivalent. GML uses a more explicit approach by 
requiring additional information about the reason for the NULL value. Whether an application uses this added 
information or not is optional. 


D.2.2 ISO 19107 Spatial Schema (Geometry) 


D.2.2.1 Overview 


The UML model of the GML profile defined in this annex describes a conceptual model of the abstract types 
defined in ISO 19107. The same names for the classes and their properties as in ISO 19107 are used to 
document the GML profile to ease the comparison with that standard.  


NOTE See chapter 2 of ISO 19107 for more details. 


The following additional changes have been applied to the geometry package of ISO 19107. 


Table 10  


Change Explanation 


GM_Primitive: association Interior to deleted Currently not supported by GML 


GM_Polygon: attribute SpanningSurface 
deleted 


Currently not supported by GML 


GM_Solid: converted the operation boundary() 
to an attribute 


As the boundary of GM_Solid is accessible only via the 
boundary() operation, an  attribute of the same name 
has been added. The attribute value is the result of the 
boundary() operation as defined in ISO 19107. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 437 
 


 


GM_Complex: association Contains deleted Currently not supported by GML 


Derived attributes deleted in GM_MultiPrimitive 
subtypes 


These attributes can be derived from the digital 
representation of the objects, therefore the redundant 
information has been omitted  


GM_CompositePoint: deleted GM_CompositePoint does not add any additional 
information. The type has been added in ISO 19107 for 
completeness only, but it is not expected that it will be 
used in GML documents. Therefore, it has been 
omitted in GML. 


GM_PolynomialSpline has been made abstract Currently not instantiable in GML, but the subtype 
GM_CubicSpline is.  


GM_LineSegment: deleted Not supported by GML, a GM_LineString with two 
control points shall be used instead 


GM_CurveBoundary: deleted Only used in operations 


GM_ComplexBoundary: deleted Only used in operations 


 


NOTE GM_OrientableCurve and GM_OrientableSurface have been changed to not abstract (in accordance with 
ISO DIS 19107. 


D.2.2.2 Geometry root 


The following UML class diagrams illustrate the profile of the Geometry root package (compare with figures 5 
to 6 of ISO 19107). 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


438  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


GM_Aggregate
<<Type>>


GM_Object
<<Type>>


GM_MultiPoint
<<Type>>


GM_MultiCurve
<<Type>>


GM_MultiSurface
<<Type>>


GM_MultiSolid
<<Type>>


GM_MultiPrimitive
<<Type>>


GM_Surface
<<Type>>


GM_Curve
<<Type>>


GM_Point
<<Type>>


GM_CompositeSolid
<<Type>>


GM_Solid
<<Type>>


GM_Ori entabl ePrimi ti ve
(from Geometric primitive)


<<Type>>


GM_Compl ex
<<Type>>


GM_Composite
<<Type>>


GM_Primitive
<<Type>>


GM_OrientableCurve
(from Geometric primitive)


<<Type>>
GM_CompositeCurve


<<Type>>


GM_CompositeSurface
<<Type>>


GM_OrientableSurface
(from Geometric primitive)


<<Type>>


 


Figure 13   







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 439 
 


 


GM_Point
(from Geometric primitive)


<<Type>>
GM_Curve


(from Geometric primitive)


<<Type>>
GM_Surface


(from Geometric primitive)


<<Type>>
GM_Solid


(from Geometric primitive)


<<Type>>


GM_Object
<<Type>>


SC_CRS
(from Spatial Referencing by Coordinates)


<<Abstract>>
0..* 0..1


+object


0..*
+CRS
0..1


Coordinate Reference System


GM_OrientableCurve
(from Geometric primitive)


<<Type>>
GM_OrientableSurface


(from Geometric primitive)


<<Type>>


GM_OrientablePrimitive
( from Geometr ic primit ive)


<<Type>>


GM_Complex
(from Geometric complex)


<<Type>>
GM_Primitive


(from Geometric primitive)


<<Type>>


0..* 1..*


+complex


0..*


+element


1..*


Complex


 


Figure 14   


The mapping of the different classes to the GML Schemas is explained in the subsequent sections showing 
details of the class hierarchy. 


GM_Object is represented by the _Geometry object element, the CRS role is represented by the 
srsName property.  


Differences are: 


 The _Geometry element can carry additional properties: an optional description element, zero or 
more name elements and an optional gml:id attribute. 


 The _Geometry element is abstract. 


D.2.2.3 Geometry primitive 


The following UML class diagrams illustrate the profile of the Geometry root package (compare with figures 7 
to 13 of ISO 19107). 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


440  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


GM_PrimitiveBoundary
<<Abstract>>


GM_Boundary
(from Geometry root)


<<Abstract>>


GM_Ring
<<Ty pe>>


GM_Sur faceBoundary
<<Ty pe>>


0..*


1


+interior0..*


1


0..1


1


+exterior 0..1


1


GM_Shell
<<Ty pe>>


GM_SolidBoundary
<<Ty pe>>


0..1


1


+exterior
0..1


1


0..*


1


+interior0..*


1


GM_CompositeSurf ace
(f rom Geometric complex)


<<Ty pe>>


GM_C ompositeCurv e
(f rom Geometric complex)


<<Ty pe>>


 


Figure 15   


The boundary classes from ISO 19107 are not represented explicitly in GML. In ISO 19107 the boundary 
types are usually the return value of an operation boundary(). As the boundary of all surface (patches) or 
solids needs to be represented in GML explicitly as properties, the exterior and interior properties have been 
defined in GML directly as properties of the surface (patch) or solid. 


GM_Ring is represented by the Ring object element. While a Ring is not substitutable for a 
CompositeCurve in GML it is structurally identical to a composite curve. 


GM_Shell is also not explicitly represented in GML by its own object element, but a _Surface object 
element (which can be composite surface) is used instead. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 441 
 


 


GM_Object
(from Geometry root)


<<Type>>


GM_Solid
<<Type>>


GM_Point
<<Type>>


GM_Curve
<<Type>>


GM_Surface
<<Type>>


GM_Orientab leCurve
<<Type>>


GM_OrientableSurface
<<Type>>


GM_Orientab lePrimitive
<<Type>>GM_Complex


(from Geometric complex)


<<Type>>


GM_Primitive
<<Type>>


0..*


1..*


+complex
0..*


+element


1..*Complex


 


Figure 16   


GM_Primitive is represented by the _GeometricPrimitive object element (both are abstract). The complex 
role is not navigable in GML. 


GM_Primitive
<<Type>>


GM_Point


+ position : DirectPosition


<<Type>>


 


Figure 17   


GM_Point is represented by a Point object element in GML. The position attribute can alternatively be 
represented by a pos property (the type of the value is DirectPosition) or a coordinates property (the type 
of the value is Coordinates, see below). 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


442  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


GM_OrientableSurface
<<Type>>


GM_Primitive
<<Type>>


GM_OrientablePrimitive
+ orientat ion : Sign


<<Type>>


1


0,2


+primitive
1


+proxy


0,2


Oriented


GM_OrientableCurve
<<Type>>


GM_Surface
<<Type>>


{primitive = self}
{orientation = "+"}


GM_Curve
<<Type>>


{(orientation = "+") implies  (primitive = self )}


{primitive.isTypeOf(GM_Curve)} {primitive.isTypeOf(GM_Surface)}


 


Figure 18   


GM_Curve is represented by the Curve object element in GML. The orientation is not an explicit property of 
a Curve and is implictly fixed to +. 


GM_OrientableCurve is represented by the OrientableCurve object element in GML. The primitive role is 
represented by the baseCurve property. 


GM_Surface is represented by the Surface object element in GML. The orientation is not an explicit 
property of a Surface and is implictly fixed to +. 


GM_Orientable Surface is represented by the OrientableSurface object element in GML. The primitive 
role is represented by the baseSurface property. 


To enable that CompositeCurve may be used in GML where in general a geometric primitive is expected, an 
abstract (and propertyless) object element _Curve has been introduced and can be substituted by either 
Curve, OrientableCurve or CompositeCurve. The same mechanism is used with surfaces and solids. As a 
result, the GM_OrientablePrimitive class is not mapped to GML explicitly, however as this type is not 
instantiable, this is does not impose any restrictions. 


NOTE This mapping is a consequence of the fact that the spatial schema uses multiple inheritance to express that a 
composite geometry, which by definition is a complex geometry, can also be viewed as a geometric primitive. Since XML 
Schema is not capable of multiple inheritance (or more precisely: derivation from multiple types), the abstract object 
elements _Curve, _Surface and _Solid have been introduced in GML to allow that both true geometric primitives 
(e.g. Curve) and composite geometries (e.g. CompositeCurve) can be in a common substitution group, although both 
are structurally different. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 443 
 


 


GM_CurveSegment
<<Abstract>>


GM_Curve
<<Type>>


1..*


0..1


+segment


1..*{sequence}


+curve0..1


Segmentation


GM_OrientableCurve
<<Type>>


GM_OrientablePrimitive
<<Type>>


GM_Primitive
<<Type>>


 


Figure 19   


As discussed above, GM_Curve is represented by the Curve object element in GML. The segment role is 
represented as an array property segments in GML. 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


444  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


GM_OrientableSurface
<<Type>>


GM_SurfacePatch
<<Abstract>>


GM_Surface
<<Type>>


1..*


0..1


+patch


1..*


+surface0..1


Segmentation


GM_OrientablePrimitive
<<Type>>


GM_Primitive
<<Type>>


 


Figure 20   


As discussed above, GM_Surface is represented by a Surface object element in GML. The patch role is 
represented as an array property patches in GML. 


GM_Primitive
<<Type>>


GM_Solid


/+ boundary : GM_SolidBoundary


<<Type>>


 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 445 
 


 


Figure 21   


GM_Solid is represented by a Solid object element in GML. The boundary of a Solid is directly expressed 
by exterior and interior properties of the solid as discussed above. 


D.2.2.4 Coordinate Geometry 


The following UML class diagrams illustrate the profile of the Coordinate Geometry package (compare with 
figures 14 to 21 of ISO 19107). 


{coordinateReferenceSystem.dimension  = 
       coordinate.size = 
       dimension}


DirectPosition


+ coordinate : Sequence<Number>
/+ dimension : Integer


<<DataType>>


SC_CRS
(from Spatial Referencing by Coordinates)


<<Abstract>>


0..*


0..1


+directPosition0..*


+coordinateReferenceSystem0..1


if not populated, then the NameSpace of the 
datatype determines the CRS, e.g. the CRS of 
the including GM_Object


GM_Envelope
+ upperCorner : DirectPosition
+ lowerCorner : DirectPosition


<<DataType>>


GM_Position
+ direct : DirectPosition
+ indirect : GM_PointRef


<<Union>>


GM_Point
(from Geometric primitive)


<<Type>>


GM_PointRef
<<DataType>>


1


0..*


+point 1


0..*


GM_Posit ion
<<Union>>


GM_PointArray
<<DataType>>


0..1
j : Integer


+column


0..1
j : Integer


 


Figure 22   


DirectPosition is in GML represented as a type with simple content where the coordinate attribute is 
mapped to a list of doubles. The coordinateReferenceSystem role is represented by a srsName attribute 
property and dimension is represented by an optional attribute property of the same name (type is 
positiveInteger). 


GM_Position is mapped to a choice between a pos property (which is of type DirectPosition) and a 
pointProperty property (which is Point-valued). A GM_PointArray is represented as a similar choice 
element, but with appropriate settings for minimum and maximum occurences. 


A single GM_Position or a GM_PointArray can alternatively be represented by a coordinates property (the 
type of the value is Coordinates which is a type with simple content that represents a list of coordinates 
encoded as a string). 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


446  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


GM_Envelope is represented as the Envelope object element in GML. The two attributes upperCorner 
and lowerCorner are mapped to properties of the same name. 


GM_Arc
<<Ty pe>>


GM_ArcStringByBulge
<<Type>>


GM_ArcString
<<Ty pe>>


GM_CurveInterpolation


+ linear
+ circularArc3Points
+ circularArc2PointWithBulge
+ polynom ialSpline
+ cubicSpl ine
+ rationalSpline


(from Geometric primitive)


<<CodeList>>


GM_SplineCurve
<<Ty pe>>


GM_CubicSpline
<<Ty pe>>


GM_BSplineCurve
<<Type>>


GM_PolynomialSpline
<<Ty pe>>


GM_LineString
<<Ty pe>>


GM_Circle
<<Ty pe>>


GM_CurveSegment


+ interpolation : GM_CurveInterpolation = "linear"
+ numDerivativesAtStart[0..1] : Integer = 0
+ numDerivativesAtEnd[0..1] : Integer = 0
+ numDerivativeInterior[0..1] : Integer = 0


(from Geometric primitive)


<<Abstract>>


GM_Curve
(from Geometric primitive)


<<Ty pe>>


1..*


0..1


+segment1..*
{s equence}


+curve0..1


Segm entation


GM_Bezier
<<Ty pe>>


 


 


Figure 23   


 


 


 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 447 
 


 


 GM_CurveSegment is represented in GML by the _CurveSegment object element (both are abstract). The 
three numDerivatives attributes are mapped to properties with the same definition. The interpolation 
attribute is not defined in _CurveSegment, but is defined (and set with approppriate initial values) in the 
instantiable subtypes. 


GML currently supports a subset of all defined curve segments of ISO 19107. 


Most subtypes of GM_CurveSegment carry a controlPoint attribute that is represented in GML by the 
choice element as described above (see discussion of the representation of a GM_PointArray). 


The code list GM_CurveInterpolation has been mapped to GML as if it would be an enumeration, i.e. no 
additional values are allowed beside the predefined values in the GML Schema. 


 


GM_CurveSegment
(from Geometric primitive)


<<Abstract>>


GM_LineString
+ controlPoint : GM_PointArray


<<Type>>


 


Figure 24   


GM_LineString is represented by the LineStringSegment object element. The Segment suffix is appended 
to the name in GML, because the name LineString is already reserved for another object element in GML 
(see below). 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


448  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


GM_CurveSegment
(from Geometric primitive)


<<Abstract>>


GM_ArcString


+ numArc : Intege r
+ con trol Points : GM_PointArray


<<Type>>


GM_Arc
<<Type>>


GM_ArcStringByBulge


+ bulge : Sequence<Real>
+ numArc : Integer
+ normal : Sequence<Vector>


<<Type>>


GM_Circle
<<Type>>


{interpolation = "circularArc3Points"}
{controlPoints.count = 2*numArc +1


{interpolation = "circularArc2PointWithBulge"}
{bulge.count = normal.count = numArc}


-- all points in the controlPoint sequence are on the same circle


-- the first and last points in the controlPoint sequence are the same


GM_ArcByBu lge
<<Typ e>>


-- all arc are on the same circle


 


Figure 25   


The curve segment types are mapped to object elements in GML with the same name (but without the GM_ 
prefix) and the same set of properties. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 449 
 


 


GM_SplineCurveForm


+ polylineForm
+ circularArc
+ ellipticArc
+ parabolicArc
+ hyperbolicArc


<<CodeList>>
GM_KnotType


+ uniform
+ quasiUniform
+ piecewiseBezier


<<CodeList>>


GM_Knot


+ value :  Real
+ multipl icity : Integer
+ weight : Real


<<DataType>>


GM_SplineCurve


+ degree : Integer
+ knot : Sequence<GM_Knot>
+ controlPoints : GM_PointArray


<<Type>>


GM_PolynomialSpline


+ vectorAtStart : Sequence<Vector>
+ vectorAtEnd : Sequence<Vector>


<<Type>>


GM_CubicSpline
<<Type>>


GM_BSplineCurve


+ curveForm[0..1] : GM_SplineCurveForm
+ knotSpec[0..1] : GM_KnotType
+ isPolynomial : Boolean


<<Type>>


{degree > 0 }
{interpolation = "polynomialSpline" }
{vectorAtEnd.count =  vectorAtStart.count = degree - 2 }


{degree = 3}
{interpolation = "cubicSpline"}


GM_CurveSegment
(from Geometric primitive)


<<Ab stract>>


{(i nterpolation  = "polynomia lSpl ine" ) OR (i nterpol ation = "ra tionalSpline)}


GM_Bezier
<<Type>>


{degree = controlPoint.count -1}
{interpolation = "polynomial"}


 


Figure 26   


Again, these curve segment types are mapped to object elements in GML with the same name (but without 
the GM_ prefix3) and the same properties4. The properties of the curve segment objects in GML have been 
specified taking the OCL constraints into account.  


The code list GM_KnotType has been mapped to GML as if it would be an enumeration, i.e. no additional 
values are allowed beside the predefined values in the GML Schema. 


 


                                                      


3  However, GM_BSplineCurve is represented by BSpline, i.e. without the Curve suffix. 


4  The knotSpec attribute has been renamed to knotType in GML. 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


450  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


GM_CurveInterpolation


linear
geodesic
circularArc3Points
circularArc2PointWithBulge
elliptical
clothoid
conic
polynomialSpline
cubicSpline
rationalSpline


(from Geometric primitive)


<<CodeList>>


GM_Arc
<<Type>>


GM_ArcString
<<Type>>


GM_Circle
<<Type>>


GM_ArcStringByBulge
<<Type>>


GM_SplineCurve
<<Type>>


GM_PolynomialSpline
<<Type>>


GM_BSplineCurve
<<Type>>


GM_Bezier
<<Type>>


GM_CubicSpline
<<Type>>


GM_LineString
<<Type>>


GM_GeodesicString
<<Type>>


GM_Geodesic
<<Type>>


GM_CurveSegment


interpolation : GM_CurveInterpolation = "linear"
numDerivativesAtStart[0..1] : Integer = 0
numDerivativesAtEnd[0. .1] : Integer = 0
numDerivativeInterior[0..1] : Integer = 0


(from Geometric primitive)


<<Abstract>>


GM_OffsetCurve
<<Type>>


GM_Curve
(f rom Geometric p rimit ive)


<<Type>>


1..*


0..1


+segment 1..*


{sequence}
+curve 0..1


Segmentation


0..*


1


0..*


+baseCurve


1


 


Figure 27  


GM_OffsetCurve class is represented in GML by the OffsetCurve object element. The object carries the 
same semantic interpretation as the class. The baseCurve property has been renamed to offsetBase. 


GM_AffinePlacement is represented in GML by the AffinePlacement object element.  


GM_GeodesicString is represented in GML by the GeodesicString object element. 


GM_Geodesic is represented in GML by the Geodesic object element. 


GM_Clothoid is represented in GML by the Clothoid object element. 


  


 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 451 
 


 


GM_SurfaceInterpolation


+ none
+ planar
+ spherical
+ elliptical
+ conic
+ tin
+ parametricCurve
+ polynomialSpline
+ rationalSpline
+ triangulatedSpline


(from Geometric  primitive)


<<CodeList>>


GM_Triangle
<<Type>>


GM_SurfacePatch


+ interpolation : GM_SurfaceInterpolation = "planar"
+ numDerivativesOnBoundary[0..1] : Integer = 0


(from Geometric primitive)


<<Abstract>>


GM_Polygon
<<Type>>


 


Figure 28   


GM_SurfacePatch is represented in GML by the _SurfacePatch object element (both are abstract). The 
numDerivativesOnBoundary attribute is currently not explicitly mapped in GML as only planar interpolation is 
currently supported in GML. The interpolation attribute is not defined in _SurfacePatch, but it is defined 
(and set with approppriate initial values) in the instantiable subtypes. 


GML currently supports a subset of all defined surface types and surface patch types of ISO 19107. 


The code list GM_SurfaceInterpolation has been mapped to GML as if it would be an enumeration, i.e. no 
additional values are allowed beside the predefined values in the GML Schema. 


 


GM_Poly gon


+ boundary  :  GM_Surf aceBoundary


<<Type>>


-- the spanning surf ace must contain the curv es
{spanningSurf ace.NotEmpty  implies 
spanningSurf ace.contains(boundary )}


GM_SurfacePatch


+ interpolation : GM_Surf aceInterpolation = "planar"
+ numDeriv ativ esOnBoundary[0..1] : Integer = 0


(from Geometric primitive)


<<Abstract>>


GM_Surf ace


(f rom Geometric primitiv e)


<<Ty pe>>


1..*0..1


+patch


1..*


+surf ace


0..1


Segmentation


GM_Triangle


+ corners[3] : GM_Position


<<Ty pe>>


 


Figure 29   







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


452  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


GM_Polygon is represented by the PolygonPatch object element. The boundary attribute is directly 
expressed by exterior and interior properties of the PolygonPatch. 


The Patch suffix has been appended to the name in GML, because the name Polygon is already reserved 
for another object element in GML (see below). 


GM_SurfacePatch


interpolation : GM_SurfaceInterpolation = "planar"
numDerivativesOnBoundary[0..1] : Integer = 0


(f ro m Geometri c primi tive )


<<Abst ract>>


GM_ParametricCurveSurface
horizontalCurveType : GM_CurveInterpolation
verticalCurveType : GM_CurveInterpolation


<<Type>>


GM_GriddedSurface


controlPoint : GM_PointGrid
/ rows : Integer
/ columns : Integer


<<Type>>


GM_Cone
<<Type>>


GM_Cylinder
<<Type>>


GM_Sphere
<<Type>>


 


Figure 30  


GM_PointGrid is represented in GML by the PointGrid group. 


GM_ParametricCurveSurface is represented in GML by the _ParametricCurveSurface object element (both 
are abstract).  


GM_GriddedSurface is represented in GML by the _GriddedSurface object element (both are abstract). 


GM_Cone is represented in GML by the Cone object element. 


GM_Cylinder is represented in GML by the Cylinder object element. 


GM_Sphere is represented in GML by the Sphere object element. 


 


 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 453 
 


 


GM_SurfacePatch


interpolation : GM_SurfaceInterpolation = "planar"
numDerivativesOnBoundary[0..1] : Integer = 0


(from Geometric primitive)


<<Abstract>>


GM_Surface
(f rom Ge ometric prim iti ve )


<<Type>>


1..* 0..1


+patch


1..*


+surface


0..1


Segmentation


GM_SurfaceInterpolation


none
planar
spherical
elliptical
conic
tin
parametricCurve
polynomialSpline
rationalSpline
triangulatedSpline


(from Geometric primitive)


<<CodeList>>


GM_Polygon
<<Type>>


GM_PolyhedralSurface
<<Type>>


1..* 0..1


+patch


1..*


+surface


0..1


GM_Triangle
<<Type>>


GM_TriangulatedSurface
<<Type>>


1..* 0..1


+patch


1..*


+surface


0..1


GM_Tin
stopLines : Set<GM_LineString>
breakLines : Set<GM_LineString>
maxLength : Distance
controlPoint [3. .*] : GM_Position


<<Type>>


{subset}


{subset}


 


Figure 31  


GM_PolyhedralSurface is represented in GML by the PolyhedralSurface object element. 


GM_TriangulatedSurface is represented in GML by the TriangulatedSurface object element. 


GM_Tin is represented in GML by the Tin object element. 


D.2.2.5 Geometry aggregates 


The following UML class diagrams illustrate the profile of the Geometry root package (compare with figure 
24 of ISO 19107). 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


454  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


GM_MultiPrimitive
<<Type>>


GM_MultiCurve
<<Type>>


GM_MultiSurface
<<Type>>


GM_MultiPoint
<<Type>>


GM_MultiSolid
<<Type>>


GM_Object
(from Geometry root)


<<Type>>


{element.subTypeOf(GM_Point)}


{e lement.subTypeOf(GM_OrientableCurve)}


{element.subTypeOf(GM_OrientableSurface)}


{element.subTypeOf(GM_Solid)}


{elements.subTypeOf(GM_Primitive)}


GM_Object
(from Geometry root)


<<Type>>GM_Aggregate
<<Type>>


0..*


+element


0..*


 


Figure 32   


GM_Aggregate is represented by the _GeometricAggregate object element (both are abstract). The 
element role is in GML instantiated in the instantiable subtypes. The general pattern is that two properties 
are defined, one is a regular association property and the other an array association property. The property 
names are xMember and xMembers respectively where the x is replaced by point, curve, surface or 
solid depending on the elements of the collection. This represents the OCL-constraints for type safetyness. 


GM_MultiPoint is represented by the MultiPoint object element in GML.  


GM_MultiCurve is represented by the MultiCurve object element in GML.  


GM_MultiSurface is represented by the MultiSurface object element in GML.  


GM_MultiSolid is represented by the MultiSolid object element in GML.  


GM_MultiPrimitive is not explicitly represented in GML. 


D.2.2.6 Geometry complex 


The following UML class diagrams illustrate the profile of the Geometry root package (compare with figures 
25 to 30 of ISO 19107). 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 455 
 


 


--All primitives in the generator are in the complex (as a set of primitives)
{Set::element->includesAll(generator)}


GM_Object
(from Geometry root)


<<Type>>


GM_Composite
<<Type>>


GM_Complex
<<Type>>


GM_Primitive
(from Geometric primit ive)


<<Type>>


1..*0..*


+generator


1..*


+composite


0..*
Composition


0.. *


1..*


+complex0.. *


+element1..*


Complex


subset


 


Figure 33   


GM_Complex is represented by the GeometricComplex object element. The element role is mapped to a 
property of the same name in GML. 


GeometricComplex can be instantiated (unlike GM_Complex which is abstract). 


The fact that the composite geometry types are subtypes of GM_Complex is represented in GML by the fact 
that every association property which takes a GeometricComplex accepts also one of the composites (due to 
a choice element in GeometricComplexPropertyType). This special mapping to XML Schema was 
necessary, because multiple inheritance, used in ISO 19107 to express the dualismof the composite 
geometries, is not supported by the derivation mechanism of XML Schema. 


 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


456  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


GM_Solid
(from Geometric primitive)


<<Type>>


GM_CompositeSolid
<<Type>>


1..*


0..*


+generator


1..*


+composite


0..*


Composition


GM_OrientableSurface
(from Geometric primitive)


<<Type>>


GM_CompositeSurface
<<Type>>


1..*


0..*


+generator


1..*


+composite
0..*


Composition


GM_CompositeCurve
<<Type>>


GM_OrientableCurve
(from Geometric primitive)


<<Type>>


0..*


1..*


+composite


0..*


+generator


1..*


{sequence}


Composition


GM_Complex
<<Type>>


GM_Composite
<<Type>>


GM_Primit ive
(from Geometric primitive)


<<Type>>


0..* 1..*


+composite


0..*


+generator


1..*


Composition


 


Figure 34   


GM_Composite is not explicitly represented by an object element in GML. However, the subtypes 
GM_CompositeCurve, GM_CompositeSurface and GM_CompositeSurface are represented in GML by 
object elements of the same name (without the GM_ prefix). The generator role is in GML instantiated in 
these subtypes by an association property with the name xMember where the x is replaced by curve, 
surface or solid depending on the elements of the collection. 


D.2.2.7 Conformance 


The rules governing conformance of a profile of ISO 19107 are described in chapter 2 and annex A of ISO 
DIS 19107. Concerning the three criteria defined in chapter 2, GML geometry covers the following levels: 


Data Complexity:  


 Geometric primitives 


 Geometric complexes 


Dimensionality: 


 0-, 1-, 2- and 3-dimensional objects 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 457 
 


 


Functional Complexity: 


 Data types only 


Thus, the relevant conformance clauses of ISO 19107 are: 


 A.1.1.1 - A.1.1.4 


 A.2.1.1 - A.2.1.3  


The conditions of these conformance clauses are met.  


Note that derived attributes are treated as operations and it is assumed that the derived attributes in the 
aggregate geometries will be derived from the data by the application handling the GML instances. 


A GM_CompositePoint is represented by a Point object element in GML. The value of the generator 
association role is the same object, i.e. the Point object itself. 


D.2.3 ISO 19107 Spatial Schema (Topology) 


D.2.3.1 Overview 


The following additional changes have been applied to the topology package of ISO 19107. 


Table 11  


Change Explanation 


TP_Complex: association isMaximal() added as a 
derived attribute 


The information was otherwise not accessible by 
means of predefined data structures of 
TP_Complex. The attribute shall be defined as a 
derived attribute representing the result of the 
isMaximal() operation as defined in ISO 19107. 


TP_Object has been changed from an interface 
class to type class (however without any properties) 
and the Realization relationships from TP_Primitive 
and TP_Complex to TP_Complex has been 
changed to Specialization relationships. 


Maintaining TP_Object as a root for the different 
topological subtypes makes to mapping to GML 
clearer. 


The optional association Realization between 
TP_Complex and GM_Complex has been deleted. 


The realization can be derived from the realization 
of the primitives contained in the topological 
complex. 


The maximalComplex role has been deleted from 
TP_Primitive. 


Currently not supported in GML 


TP_Boundary and subtypes as well as TP_Ring and 
TP_Shell have been deleted. 


Only used in operations 


 


D.2.3.2 Topology root 


The following UML class diagrams illustrate the profile of the Topology root package (compare with figures 
32 to 33 of ISO 19107). 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


458  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


TP_Expression
<<DataType>>


TP_DirectedNode
<<Type>>


TP_Edge
<<Type>>


TP_Node
<<Type>>


TP_DirectedEdge
<<Type>>


TP_Face
<<Type>>


TP_DirectedSolid
<<Type>>


TP_Solid
<<Type>>


TP_DirectedFace
<<Type>>


TP_DirectedTopo
<<Type>>


TP_Primitive
<<Type>>


TP_Complex
<<Type>>


1..* 1..*


+element


1..*


+complex


1..*


Complex


TP_Object
(from   Topology root)


<<Type>>


 


Figure 35   







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 459 
 


 


GM_Object
(from Geometry root)


<<Type>>


TP_Primitive
(from  Topological primitive)


<<Type>>
TP_Complex


(from Topological Complex)


<<Type>>


1..*
1..*


+superComplex


1..* /Contains


+subComplex
1..*1..* 1..*


+element


1..*


+complex
1..*Complex


GM_Primitive
(from Geometric primitive)


<<Type>>


0..*


0..1


+topology 0..*


+geometry 0..1


Realization


GM_Complex
(from Geometric complex)


<<Type>>


1..*


0..*+element


1..* +complex


0..*


Complex


TP_Object
(f rom   T opol ogy roo t)


<<Type>>


 


Figure 36   


The mapping of the different classes to the GML Schemas is explained in the subsequent sections showing 
details of the class hierarchy. 


TP_Object is represented by the _Topology object element. The _Topology element may carry additional 
properties: an optional description element, zero or more name elements and an optional gml:id attribute. 


D.2.3.3 Topology primitive 


The following UML class diagrams illustrate the profile of the Topology root package (compare with figures 
35 to 45 of ISO 19107). 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


460  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


-- topological dimension agrees with geometric dimension


-- basic geometric operation are preserved


-- isolated topology is codimension at least 2


-- a primitive is its own positive TP_DirectedTopo


GM_Primitive
(from Geometric primitive)


<<Type>>


TP_Complex
(from Topological Complex)


<<Type>> TP_Primitive
<<Type>>


0..1


0..*


+geometry0..1


+topology0..*


Realization


0..*0..1
+isolated


0..*


Isolated In


+container
0..11..*1..* +element 1..*+complex 1..*


Complex


TP_Object
(from   Topology root)


<<Type>>


 


Figure 37   


TP_Primitive is represented by the _TopoPrimitive object element. 


The geometry role is instantiated in the instantiable subtypes. This allows to control the geometry types at 
the other association end (dimensionality constraint): pointProperty, curveProperty, surfaceProperty and 
solidProperty respectively. 


The isolated and container roles are represented as properties in _TopoPrimitive. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 461 
 


 


TP_Primitive
<<Type>>


TP_DirectedTopo
<<Type>>


1


2


+topo


1


+proxy


2


Center


TP_DirectedFace
<<Type>>


TP_DirectedSolid
<<Type>>


TP_Solid
<<Type>>


TP_DirectedNode
<<Type>>


TP_Edge
<<Type>>


TP_Node
<<Type>>


TP_Face
<<Type>>


TP_DirectedEdge
<<Type>>


 


Figure 38   


TP_Solid
<<Type>>


TP_DirectedSolid
<<Type>>


1


2


+topo1


+proxy2


Center


TP_DirectedFace
<<Type>>


TP_Face
<<Type>>


2


1


+proxy 2


+topo
1


Center


TP_DirectedEdge
<<Type>>


TP_Edge
<<Type>>


2


1


+proxy 2


+topo 1


Center


TP_DirectedNode
<<Type>>


TP_Node
<<Type>>


2


1


+proxy 2


+topo 1


Center


{orientation = "+" implies topo = self}


TP_Primitive
<<Type>>


TP_DirectedTopo
<<Type>>


1


2


+topo 1


+proxy 2


Center


{primitive = self}
{orientation = "+"}


 


Figure 39   







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


462  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


TP_Node is represented by the Node object element in GML. 


TP_Edge is represented by the Edge object element in GML. 


TP_Face is represented by the Face object element in GML. 


TP_Solid is represented by the TopoSolid object element in GML (the name Solid is already used for the 
3-dimensional geometry primitve). 


TP_DirectedTopo is not explicitly represented in GML, only its instantiable subtypes. A notable difference is 
that although the directed topology types are modelled as types they are represented as properties with an 
orientation attribute in GML. 


TP_DirectedNode is represented by the directedNode property element in GML. The topo role is 
represented directly by the Node object element. 


TP_DirectedEdge is represented by the directedEdge property element in GML. The topo role is 
represented directly by the Edge object element. 


TP_DirectedFace is represented by the directedFace property element in GML. The topo role is 
represented directly by the Face object element. 


TP_DirectedSolid is represented by the directedTopoSolid property element in GML. The topo role is 
represented directly by the TopoSolid object element. 


TP_DirectedSolid
<<Type>>


TP_Solid
<<Type>>


1
2+topo


1 +proxy


2


Center


TP_DirectedFace
<<Type>>


1..*


0..2


+boundary
1..*


+primitive
0..2


Boundary


TP_Face
<<Type>>


2
1 +proxy


2+topo
1


Center


TP_DirectedEdge
<<Type>>


1..*


0..*


+boundary
1..*


+primitive
0..*


Boundary


TP_Node
<<Type>>


TP_Edge
<<Type>>


2


1 +proxy


2+topo


1 Center


TP_DirectedNode
<<Type>>


2


1 +proxy


2+topo


1
Center


0..*


2


+primitive
0..*


+boundary


2
Boundary


TP_DirectedNode
<<Type>>


TP_Node
<<Type>> 2


1 +proxy


2+topo


1


Center


TP_DirectedEdge
<<Type>>


1


0..*


+hub
1


+spoke
0..*


CoBoundary


TP_Edge
<<Type>> 2


1 +proxy


2+topo


1


Center


TP_Solid
<<Type>>


TP_DirectedFace
<<Type>>


0..*


1..*


+spoke
0..*


{CircularSequence}


+hub
1..*


CoBoundary


TP_DirectedSolid
<<Type>>


1


2+topo


1 +proxy


2
Center


TP_Face
<<Type>> 2


1 +proxy


2+topo


1


Center


0..2


1..*


+spoke


0..2


+hub
1..* CoBoundary


 


Figure 40   


The mapping of the topo role is already discussed above. 


The spoke role is represented in GML by directed Edge, directedFace and directedTopoSolid properties 
respectively.  







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 463 
 


 


The boundary role is represented in GML by directed Node, directedEdge and directedFace properties 
respectively.  


D.2.3.4 Topology complex 


The following UML class diagrams illustrate the profile of the Topology complex package (compare with 
figure 46 of ISO 19107). 


-- the maximalComplex contains this complex
{superComplex->contains(maximalComplex)}
-- a maximal complex is contained only in itself
{(self = maximalComplex) implies (superComplex = {self}) }
{isMaximal implies (self = maximalComplex)}


TP_Primitive
(from  Topological primitive)


<<Type>>


TP_Complex


/+ isMaximal : Boolean


<<Type>>


1..* 1..*


+superComplex


1..*


/Contains


+subComplex
1..*


1..* 1..*


+element


1..*


+complex


1..*Complex


1+maximalComplex 1


TP_Object
(f rom   Topology root )


<<Type>>


 


Figure 41   


TP_Complex is represented by the TopoComplex object element.  


The element role is mapped to two properties  one regular association property topoPrimitiveMember and 
one array association property topoPrimitiveMembers. 


The subComplex and superComplex roles are represented as association properties of the same name. 
The minimum multiplicity, however, is 0 for both properties in GML instead of 1. This reflects that it is not 
required that this property is represented explicitly in a GML instance (note that it is a derived association). 


The maximalComplex role is represented as an association property of the same name in GML. 


D.2.3.5 Conformance 


The rules governing conformance of a profile with ISO 19107 are described in chapter 2 and annex A of ISO 
DIS 19107. Concerning the three criteria defined in chapter 2, GML topology covers the following levels: 


Data Complexity:  


 Topological complexes 


 Topological complexes with geometric realizations 


Dimensionality: 


 0-, 1-, 2- and 3-dimensional objects 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


464  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


Functional Complexity: 


 Data types only 


Thus, the relevant conformance clauses of ISO 19107 are: 


 A.3.1.1 - A.3.1.3  


 A.4.1.1 - A.4.1.3  


The conditions of these conformance clauses are met. 


Note that the association Realization between TP_Complex and GM_Complex is not an explicit part of the 
profile, because the geometrical realization of the topological complex can be derived from the geometrical 
realization of the topological primitives. 


D.2.4 ISO 19108 Temporal Schema 


D.2.4.1 Overview 


The GML temporal schemas provides an implementation of clauses 5.2 - 5.4 of ISO 19108:2002.    


The following changes have been applied to the packages of ISO 19108. 


Table 12  


 Change Explanation 


1 The beginning and ending associations are 
implemented as unidirectional from TM_Period to 
TM_Instant 


Maintaining bi-directional pointers deemed unnecessary in a 
static data encoding 


2 The beginning and ending associations from 
TM_Period are implemented as a choice  of (a UML 
association with TM_Instant or a UML attribute of 
type TM_Position) 


Allows a more compact encoding of the same information 
when a TM_Instant object with identity is not required 


3 The termination and initiation associations are 
implemented as unidirectional from TM_Edge to 
TM_Node 


Maintaining bi-directional pointers deemed unnecessary in a 
static data encoding 


4 The realization associations are implemented as 
unidirectional from TM_Instant and TM_Period to 
TM_Node and TM_Edge respectively 


Maintaining bi-directional pointers deemed unnecessary in a 
static data encoding 


5 The basis association is implemented as 
unidirectional from TM_Calendar to TM_CalendarEra 


Maintaining bi-directional pointers deemed unnecessary in a 
static data encoding 


7 The begin and end attributes of TM_OrdinalEra are 
replaced by associations with TM_Node, with 
rolenames start and end 


Practice in historical and geological sciences is that the 
termination points of an Ordinal Era are associated with 
events whose position may not be known precisely. This 
matches with the concept of of TM_Node whose position is 
available indirectly.   


8 The origin attribute of TM_CoordinateSystem is 
implemented as choice  of (a UML association with 
TM_Instant or a UML attribute of type TM_Position) 


Allows the origin to be specified in terms of an external 
event.   


9 The interval attribute of TM_CoordinateSystem is 
implemented as TM_Interval Length 


Allows the scale to be specified more precisely and flexibly.   


 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 465 
 


 


NOTE 1 Change 2 takes advantage of the <choice> structure which is provided by the XML Schema implementation 
language.  This supports a more flexible and compact encoding, containing the same information, than would have been 
gained by mechanical application of the standard encoding rules.   


NOTE 2 A change proposal has been submitted regarding ISO 19108 to match the issue identified in change 7.   


Of the classes dealing with temporal relationships between features, described in clause 5.5 of ISO 
19108:2002, only Feature Succession has been implemented directly.  Components corresponding to the 
other relationships may be defined in GML application schemas, but are not discussed further here.    


The mapping of the different classes to the GML Schemas is explained in the subsequent sections showing 
details of the class hierarchy.  


The following UML class diagrams illustrate the profile of the Temporal Objects package (compare with 
figures 2 to 6 and 11 of ISO 19108:2002). 


D.2.4.2 Temporal Objects 


 


Figure 42  Main hierarchy of temporal objects from ISO 19108:2002 


 TM_Object is represented by the _TimeObject object element. The _TimeObject element can carry 
additional properties: an optional description element, zero or more name elements and an optional 
gml:id attribute.  These properties are inherited by all the components that are substitutable for _TimeObject.   


 TM_Primitive is represented by the _TimePrimitive object element.  


TM_GeometricPrimitive is represented by the _TimeGeometricPrimitive object element.  


TM_TopologicalPrimitive is represented by the _TimeTopologyPrimitive object element.  


TM_Complex is represented by the _TimeComplex object element.  


TM_TopologicalComplex is represented by the _TimeTopologyComplex object element.  







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


466  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


D.2.4.3 Concrete Temporal Geometric Primitives 


 


Figure 43  Profile of temporal geometric objects adapted from ISO 19108:2002 


TM_Primitive is represented by the _TimePrimitive object element. Additional properties relatedTime 
representing the result of relativePosition(other:TM_Primitive) operations has been added.  


TM_GeometricPrimitive is represented by the _TimeGeometricPrimitive object element. An additional 
property _timeLength representing the result of the length() operation has been added.   


 TM_Instant is represented by the TimeInstant object element. The position attribute is represented by the 
timePosition property. 


TM_Period is represented by the TimePeriod object element. The begin and end roles are represented 
by association properties of the same name in GML.  These associations have an alternative representation in 
GML as follows: end is in a choice block with endPosition and begin with beginPosition, the latter in 
each case has simple content as discussed in clause 14.2.3.4.   







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 467 
 


 


D.2.4.4 Temporal Duration 


 


Figure 44  DataTypes representing temporal duration ISO 19108:2002 


The GML property element _timeLength is abstract, with either an timeInterval or duration  element 
substituting.  These have XML Schema types which implement the data types shown in Figure 44, as follows:  


TM_IntervalLength is implemented using a simpleContent type constructed by adding the XML attributes 
unit, radix and factor to the  XML Schema built-in type decimal;  


TM_PeriodDuration is implemented by the XML Schema built-in type duration (see discussion in clause 
14.2.3.7).  The XML Schema type duration prescribes a literal value with the lexical form described in ISO 
8601, which removes the need to implement the list of attributes of the TM_PeriodDuration class separately.  







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


468  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


D.2.4.5 Temporal Position 


 


Figure 45 Temporal position, from ISO 19108:2002 


Components represented as UML attributes of type TM_Position are represented as GML properties with XML 
Schema type gml:TimePositionType.  This is a simpleContent type the details of whose derivation are 
described in clause 14.2.3.4.  This represents the requirements shown in Figure 45 as follows:   


TM_Coordinate, which gives temporal position represented by a single number, is implemented by XML 
Schema type decimal; 


TM_OrdinalPosition, which carries an association with a TM_OrdinalEra, is implemented by XML Schema 
type anyURI, which follows the pattern used in GML where associations are implemented through 
references; 


TM_CalDate, which carries attributes consisting of sequence of numbers for the calendar date, and an era 
name, is implemented in gml:CalDate by a union (choice) of XML Schema types date, gYear, gMonth, 
whose lexical representations follow ISO 8601, to which an XML attribute calendarEraName is added;  


TM_ClockTime, which carries a sequence of numbers describing an instant that recurs daily, is implemented 
by XML Schema type time, whose lexical representation follows ISO 8601;  


TM_DateAndTime is implemented by XML Schema type dateTime, whose lexical representation follows 
ISO 8601;  


The variants date8601, time8601 and dateTime8601, shown in TM_Position, are implemented by the 
XML Schema types date, time and dateTime, already introduced;    


IndeterminatePosition is represented using an XML attribute of the same name;  







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 469 
 


 


The role frame is implemented using an XML attribute of the same name, whose value has type anyURI, 
which follows the pattern used in GML where associations are implemented through references.   


D.2.4.6 Temporal Topology 


 


Figure 46  Profile of temporal topology adapted from ISO 19108:2002 


TM_TopologicalComplex is represented by the _TimeTopologyComplex object element. The primitive 
role is implemented by a property element of the same name.   


TM_TopologicalPrimitive is represented by the _TimeTopologyPrimitive object element. The complex role 
is implemented as a reference by a property element of the same name, though this is made optional.   


TM_Node is implemented by the TimeNode object element. The previousEdge and nextEdge roles are 
implemented by property elements of the same name in GML.  The geometry role is implemented by the 
position property. 


TM_Edge is implemented by the TimeEdge object element. The start and end roles are implemented by 
property elements of the same name in GML.  The geometry role is implemented by the extent property.   


D.2.4.7 Temporal Reference Systems 


The following UML class diagrams illustrate the profile of the Temporal Reference Systems package 
(compare with figures 7 to 10 of ISO 19108:2002). 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


470  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 


Figure 47 Hierarchy of temporal reference systems from ISO 19108:2002 


TM_ReferenceSystem is implemented by the _TimeReferenceSystem object element. The 
_TimeReferenceSystem element can carry additional properties: an optional description element, one or 
more name elements and an optional gml:id attribute.  The domainOfValidity attribute is implemented 
using an XML attribute of the same name.  This has XML Schema type string which implements the 
description attribute of EX_Extent (see ISO 19115:2003).  


These properties are inherited by all the components that are substitutable for _TimeReferenceSystem.   


D.2.4.8 Calendars and Clocks 


 


Figure 48 Model for calendar and clock, from ISO 19108:2002 


TM_Calendar is implemented by the TimeCalendar object element. The referenceFrame role is 
implemented as a property element of the same name. 


TM_CalendarEra is implemented by the TimeCalendarEra object element. The referenceEvent, 
referenceDate, julianReference and epochOfUse attributes are implemented as property elements of the 
same names. 


TM_Clock is implemented by the TimeClock object element.  The referenceEvent, referenceTime, and 
utcReference attributes are implemented as property elements of the same names.  The dateBasis role is 
implemented as a property element of the same name. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 471 
 


 


D.2.4.9 Time Coordinate Systems 


 


Figure 49 Model for temporal coordinate system, from ISO 19108:2002 


TM_CoordinateSystem is implemented by the TimeCoordinateSystem object element. The origin attribute 
is implemented as a choice of property elements origin, which refers to a TimeInstant, or originPosition 
which encodes a position directly.  The interval attribute is implemented as a property element of the same 
name, using TimeIntervalLengthType which follows ISO 11404.   


D.2.4.10 Temporal Ordinal Reference System 


 


Figure 50 Model for temporal ordinal reference system, adapted from ISO 19108:2002 


TM_OrdinalReferenceSystem is implemented by the TimeOrdinalReferenceSystem object element. The 
component role is implemented as a property element of the same name.   


TM_OrdinalEra is implemented by the TimeOrdinalEra object element.  The name, begin and end 
attributes are implemented by the name, start and end properties inherited from TimeEdge.  The 
member role is implemented as property element of the same name.  The group role is implemented as a 
reference by a property element of the same name.  Optional description and gml:id properties are also 
inherited from TimeEdge.   


D.2.4.11 Conformance 


The rules governing conformance of a profile with ISO 19108 are described in chapter 2 and annex A of ISO 
19108. Concerning the criteria defined in chapter 2, GML as an application schema for data transfer targets 
conformance with A.1. The conditions of this conformance clause are met by the profile specified above. 


D.2.5 ISO 19109 Rules for App Schema 


GML implements a subset of the general feature model defined in ISO DIS 19109.  







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


472  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


In addition extensions are implemented by GML. The general feature model is concerned only with feature 
types whereas an application schema (in GML or UML) will often deal with additional information types. 
Examples are data types, enumeration types, union types, etc. which all cannot be represented using the 
general feature model. ISO DIS 19109 therefore specifies that only a one-way mapping from the general 
feature model to the application schema is possible.  


Like in the case of UML, the mapping from the general feature model to the GML feature model described in 
XML Schema is in general straightforward. 


The following changes have been applied to the general feature model of ISO 19109. 


Table 13  


 Change Explanation 


1 GF_FeatureOperation deleted Operation are not supported 


2 Multiplicity of GF_InheritanceRelation/supertype 
changed to 1 


Only single inheritance is supported and mapped to the type 
derivation mechanism of XML Schema 


 


Some additional comments on the following metaclasses of the general feature model: 


Table 14  


 Change Explanation 


1 GF_AssocationType In general, the composition of association roles to 
associations is not directly represented in GML application 
schemas. 


If the relationship between two association roles shall be 
expressed explicitly in the GML application schema, then 
the roles may be cross-referenced by  


- representing the element name of the target object 
class in an appInfo annotation with the source urn:x-
gml:targetObjectType 


- representing the property name of the inverse 
association roles in an appInfo annotation with the 
source urn:x-gml:inverseProperty 


- optionally representing the name of the association in 
an appInfo annotation with the source urn:x-
gml:associationName 


2 GF_Constraint Constraints may be mapped to schematron constraints or 
may be just expressed as text in documentation 
annotations. 


 


The relationship between an application schema in UML and in GML is described as part of the annexes E 
and F dealing with the mapping between ISO 19109 and GML Application Schemas. 


D.2.6 ISO 19111 Spatial Referencing By Coordinates  


ISO DIS 19118 Annex A has been used to map the conceptual model to the corresponding XML Schema 
definitions. This conversion to XML Schemas was done in a manner that makes the results consistent with 
GML 3.0. Therefore, the encoding rules used were adapted to produce XML Schemas consistent with the 
GML 3 schema patterns, and to use some of the predefined XML elements and types defined in the GML 3 
schemas. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 473 
 


 


NOTE  See also the proposed changes to ISO DIS 19118 as a result of the encoding rules for GML application 
schemas specified in Annex E. 


Although the conceptual model is to a very large extent based on ISO 19111, it deviates on a number of 
points and adds a considerable degree of detail, consistent with the need to provide a specification ready for 
implementation in the geospatial market place. A list of these variations is: 


NOTE  This list is not completely up-to-date and will need some minor revision. It is the intention that this will result in 
a proposal for a technical amendment for ISO 19111 (possibly via the WI 19140 process). 


 Use of UML 
Inheritance of attributes is not dealt with consistently in ISO DIS 19111. In the model used for GML all 
common attributes and referenced objects have been placed in the highest level (abstract) superclass. 
This eliminates separate identifiers for SC_CoordinateReferenceSystem, SC_CompoundCRS, 
CC_Operation and CC_ConcatenatedOperation. 


Conflict with ISO 19111? None. It would not result in any conflict at the implementation level. Only 
apparent differences exist with the ISO DIS 19111 UML model. 


 Coordinate Reference System subtypes 
ISO DIS 19111 do not mention subtypes of this class. OGC believes it crucial that this is done, as this 
subtyping has been part of geodetic practice for many years. The taxonomy is based on the way the 
effects of earth curvature are dealt with. This has a direct impact on the size of the area for which the 
coordinate reference system is suited. The main types are: 


 geocentric, describing point locations in 3D space; suited to cover the entire earth; 


 geographic, describing point locations on or relative to a reference ellipsoid, approximating the geoid 
over a significant region of the earth; 


 projected, treating the earths geometry as a flat plane, but carefully controlled distortion; typically 
suited for (parts of) countries; 


 engineering, treating the earths surface as flat, disregarding earth curvature; suited for small areas. 


This subtyping has been Implemented by an attribute with enumerated values. This might alternatively be 
implemented by subclassing, but this would result in a very complex model. A notable addition to the list 
not mentioned in ISO 19111 is the subtype Temporal CRS. 


Conflict with ISO 19111? Yes, although it could be seen as a permitted addition where ISO 19111 
describes minimum requirements. 


 Coordinate System subtypes 
ISO 19111 introduce subtyping at this level, showing however a mixed taxonomy. Projected is the outlier 
here. Projected refers to the way earth curvature is dealt with. The ISO taxonomy is, with this exception, 
by geometry of the coordinate frame. This document honours this subtyping, but adds some types, 
notably linear CS and temporal CS. 


Conflict with ISO 19111? Yes, although it could be seen as a permitted addition where ISO 19111 describes 
minimum requirements. 


 Derived Coordinate Reference Systems 
This document adds a concept that is not at all modeled in ISO 19111, viz. Derived CRS. Some CRSs 
cannot exist without the relationship with a source CRS having been defined, as is the case with a 
projected CRS. This requires the following changes to the ISO 19111 model: 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


474  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 a self-reference relationship in SC_CoordinateReferenceSystem, permitting a source CRS to be 
defined for a derived CRS; 


 a relationship between SC_CoordinateReferenceSystem and CC_Conversion, permitting the defining 
coordinate conversion to be specified. 


Making the two relationships from CC_CoordinateOperation to SC_CRS optional, to permit the source 
and target CRS to not be specified in the case of a Defining Conversion. Leaving these relationships 
mandatory would lead to a potential data conflict, as the information about source and target CRS would 
be duplicated. 


The ISO 19111 URL schema of figure B.1 in ISO 19111 documents a relationship between 
SC_CoordinateSystem and SC_Ellipsoid that is not described in the text. Since the same diagram shows 
a relationship to CC_Operation, equally not found back in the text, it is assumed that this is an 
(unsatisfactory) attempt to model projected CRSs. It is unsatisfactory because the document gives no 
indication how this is to be done. Furthermore, any literal implementation would result in a number of 
practical problems. It is for these reasons that the constructs in this document are proposed as an 
alternative, improved way to achieve inferred objective. 


Conflict with ISO 19111? Yes. 


 Coordinate operations 
Modelling detail has been added in the area of coordinate operations. A new superclass 
CC_CoordinateOperation has been created to capture the shared attributes and relationships of the 
CC_Operation and CC_ConcatenatedOperation classes. In addition three more new classes have been 
created: 


 CC_OperationMethod 


 CC_OperationParameter 


 CC_ParameterValue 


One of the two reasons was normalisation, to avoid repetition of attribute values in instantiated objects. 


The more important reason was to create a structure that permits being prescriptive about what operation 
parameters are used by what method. It permits being prescriptive about the operation methods 
themselves. This part of the model comes close to the heart of coordinate transformation software. The 
prevalence of distributed computing necessitates standardisation in the data: a coordinate operation may 
be requested specifying an operation method that is not recognised by the server software. If it does 
recognise the method, it may not recognise the operation parameters quoted. Is the parameter called 
scale factor at central meridian, scale factor at natural origin, false magnification, etc? The modelling 
construct proposed is derived from the EPSG data model, that has proven to be able to resolve this 
issue. 


Conflict with ISO 19111? Yes, but it is quite possible to interpret the extra classes as additional detail 
implementing the more general ISO 19111 model. 


Additionally, some of the changes have been introduced to slightly better support conversion to XML 
Schemas.  


Wherever a GML object is associated with a Coordinate Reference System, this is implemented by an 
attribute (srsName) pointing to a gml:CoordinateReferenceSystem element. 


D.2.7 ISO 19112 Spatial Referencing By Geographic Identifiers  


GML does not provide a pre-defined schema for gazetteers. However, it does provide pre-defined properties 
for spatial references by geographic identifiers: 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 475 
 


 


 The property <gml:LocationString> contains or references a text that describes the location. 


 The property <gml:LocationKeyword> is a code usually selected from a controlled list, e.g. a ZIP code. 
 


D.2.8 ISO 19115 Metadata 


GML does not provide an information model for metadata. Instead a mechanism to include or reference 
metadata is provided for all object elements. 


NOTE As specified in clause 7.5.8, if metadata following the conceptual model of ISO 19115:2003 shall be 
encoded in a GML document, the corresponding Implementation Specification specified in ISO WD 19139 
shall be used to encode the metadata information. 


D.2.9 ISO 19117 Portrayal 


D.2.9.1 Overview 


This section provides a comparison of ISO 19117 and the GML Default Style Specification from GML.  Since 
GML Default Style was not direrctly derived from ISO 19117 some additional background explanation is 
required. 


GML Default Style is intended as an implementation specification that provides an XML mechanism for the 
description of rules for the styling of GML into SVG. It makes use of XML, XML Schema, XLink, XPath (2.0) 
and SVG.  Note that SVG is capable of displaying both vector and image graphics including in particular tiff, 
png and jpeg image formats. 


GML Default Style does not break the principle of separating content and presentation.  It does provide a 
mechanism by which application schema developers can associate graphical presentation styles, expressed 
in SVG, with GML features.  These are to be treated as default styles and may be ignored by a styling 
application. 


This section compares the principles, conformance clauses and specific mechanisms of ISO 19117 with those 
of this version of GML. 


D.2.9.2 Portrayal Mechanism from ISO 19117 


The basic portrayal mechanism from ISO 19117 is illustrated in Figure 51 (this is Figure 2 in ISO/DIS 19117): 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


476  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 


Figure 51  ISO 19117 Portrayal Mechanism 


The following basic principles of ISO Portrayal are summarized in the figure: 


a) It is a based on a declarative rule structure (e.g. If (portrayal rule) then Apply (portrayal specification) 
else (apply default portrayal specification). 


b) Datasets and Portrayal Rules are separate from one another or must be capable of being separated 
from one another. 


c) Portrayal rules can be organized into catalogues. 


d) Portrayal rules select what is to be portrayed in the dataset. 


e) Portrayal specifications state how what is selected in the portrayal rule is to be graphically presented. 


Figure 51 is reinforced by the high level UML model in ISO 19117 shown here as Figure 52. 


 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 477 
 


 


 


Figure 52  Portrayal UML Diagram from ISO 19117 


Note that Features are associated with 1 or more FeaturePortrayals with the role of the FeaturePortrayal as 
portrayed_by.   


In GML Default Style the property <gml:defaultStyle> is introduced. This property has the schema as shown in 
Figure 53 and is equivalent to ISO 19117 portrayed_by association role. 


 


_Style


+description : string
+name : string


Style


Feature +defaultStyle
0..*







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


478  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


Figure 53  gml:defaultStyle property associates feature instance and style 


The GML defaultStyle property can encapsulate a style definition or can reference one using the xlink:href 
property.  This then corresponds to the UML diagram. 


EXAMPLE <abc:Road gml:id=r1> 


  <gml:defaultStyle xlink:href =http://www.mysite.org/mystyle.xml /> 


  <abc:numLanes>3</abc:numLanes> 


 </abc:Road> 


Styles in GML default style can be referenced as shown or can appear in-line i.e. inside the gml:defaultStyle 
property. 


GML defaultStyle provides a concrete Style element for which the styling grammar is specified and an abstract 
substitution group head gml:_Style to which one can equivalence some other concrete style element with a 
different styling grammar. 


Styles thus correspond to Portrayal Catalogues in ISO 19117.  FeaturePortrayal objects consist of the 
gml:FeatureStyle element together with the featureType attribute. 


The Feature Portrayal (ISO 19117) has one or more Portrayal Rules.  A Portrayal Rule is in effect a filter to 
select a feature instance based on its attributes or associations to other features.   


EXAMPLE An example from ISO 19117 document is:  


 (Road.classification .EQ. country road) 


In GML Default Style the Portrayal Rule is handled by one of the style elements, namely: 


 FeatureStyle (cardinality 0 to unbounded) 


 Graph Style 


FeatureStyle is intended to describe the portrayal rules and portrayal specification (ISO terminology) for a 
Feature, and can be correlated to the ISO 19117 PF_FeaturePortrayal class. 


Graph Style has no correlate in ISO 19117 and refers to the portrayal of 1-D graphs from feature collections. 


The FeatureStyle element references the associated feature-type using the featureType attribute as in: (this is 
part of FeaturePortrayal in ISO 19117). 


 <gml:FeatureStyle featureType = Road>  </gml:FeatureStyle> 


The Portrayal Rule (ISO 19117) is then constructed using the gml:FeatureStyle in conjunction with the 
featureConstraint. featureConstraint is an XPath expression that is applied against all features of type = 
feature-type. 


EXAMPLE text(abc:Road/abc:classification) = country road 


This selects all abc:Road features with classification property of country road. 


The featureConstraint corresponds to the ISO 19117 feature PortrayalRule.  The results of applying the XPath 
expression to a feature of type = feature-type is then styled in accordance with contents of the Feature Style 
which can include references to external presentation information. 


NOTE GML allows only a single featureConstraint per each FeatureStyle, but that there can be any number of 
FeatureStyle elements in a Style. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 479 
 


 


LabelStyle


<<mixed>>+label : LabelExpression
+style : string


FeatureStyle


+queryGrammar : enumeration
+featureConstraint : string
+featureType : string
+baseType : string


GeometryStyle


+geometryProperty : string
+geometryType : string
+symbol : SymbolType


TopologyStyle


+topologyProperty : string
+symbol : SymbolType


+topologyType : string


Style


+geometryStyle0..* +topologyStyle0..*


+labelStyle
0..1


+featureStyle0..*


+labelStyle
0..1


 


Figure 54  Feature Style UML Model  


D.2.9.3 Portrayal Service 


The Portrayal Service is a service to portray feature instances.  It has one method in the ISO UML model, 
namely portrayFeature.  Since GML Default Style is only concerned with the implementation of style 
description such an abstract Portrayal Service is not required in the GML default style specification.  The 
operation portrayFeature takes the arguments: a list of feature instances and a portrayalCatalogue consisting 
of one or more portrayal rules.  


D.2.9.4 Portrayal Catalogue 


This package defines the classes: 


 PF_PortrayalCatalogue 


 PF_FeaturePortrayal 


 PF_PortrayalRule 


 PF_ExternalFunction 


 PF_AttributeDefinition 


The contents of the package are shown in Figure 55.  Note that a PF_PortrayalCatalogue is an aggregation of 
one or more PF_FeaturePortrayal classes each containing 1 or more PF_PortrayalRule classes. 


Portrayal rules may invoke external functions.  Signatures of such external functions are described using 
PF_ExternalFunction.  Formal parameters associated with these external functions are provided by the 
PF_AttributeDefinition class. 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


480  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


The Portrayal Specification is associated with one or more Portrayal Rules. 


 


Figure 55  Portrayal Catalogue UML Model 


D.2.9.5 PF_PortrayalCatalogue 


This class is an organization of a set of feature portrayal rules. It corresponds to a gml:Style in GML default 
style. 


The attributes of PF_Portrayal Catalogue are: 


 queryLanguage  this specifies notation for how queries are defined. 


 actionLanguage  this specifies the notion for how actions are performed. 


 defaultPortrayalSpec 


 functionalLanguage  name of the functional language used. 


In the abstract specification of ISO 19117 queryLanguage is OCL and the actionLanguage is UML. 


In GML Default style the queryLanguage is XPath, the actionLanguage is XPath/SVG/CSS2 and the 
functionalLanguage is XPath. 


The associations of PF_PortrayalCatalogue are: 


 featurePortrayal  a list of featurePortrayal objects 


 externalFunction  references a list of external functions 


In GML default style the gml:Style is equivalent to a PF_PortrayalCatalogue. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 481 
 


 


A gml:Style contains one or more FeatureStyle elements via featureStyle associations.  These contain the 
portrayal rules that are applied to the GML instances. 


D.2.9.6 PF_FeaturePortrayal 


The PF_FeaturePortrayal refers to a feature class through the feature name attribute. There is the definedFor 
feature association that refers to the feature type. 


NOTE This is what the text says, but not what the UML shows! 


In GML default style we have the featureType attribute of the FeatureStyle.  This corresponds to the 
PF_FeaturePortrayal object. 


PF_FeaturePortrayal has an optional attribute Priority.  This is not supported in GML default style. 


PF_FeaturePortrayal has a description attribute. In GML default style we have the equivalent description 
attribute on FeatureStyle type inherited from the base GML object (_GML)  


D.2.9.7 PF_PortrayalRule 


PF_PortrayalRule is a portrayal rule and corresponds in GML to the featureConstraint element of 
FeatureStyle.  In GML, the content of this element is an XPath/XQuery expression that is assumed to have 
access to all properties of features referenced by the containing FeatureStyle element. 


PF_PortrayalRule has the following attributes: 


 ruleName = name of the rule  gml:name property of gml:FeatureStyle element. 


 priority = priority between rules  NOT supported in GML. 


 description = description of the rule  gml:description property of gml:FeatureStyle element. 


 queryStatement a formal specification in the stated query language that evaluates to True or False. In 
GML this is the featureConstraint property. This can be viewed as being applied to the GML instances and 
evaluating to an XPath node set containing the feature instances that satisfy the constraint OR being used 
in the match attribute of an XSLT template that when true invokes the action part of the template.  The 
interpretation is thus implementation dependent. 


PF_PortrayalRule has the associations: 


 (list of) external functions  this is done in GML via the XSLT extension function mechanism. 


 portrayalAction  formal expression in the action language including pre-processing statements and calls 
to portrayal operations.  This is done in GML through XPath and implicit calls to SVG operations. 


D.2.9.8 Portrayal Specification 


The Portrayal Specification package defines the following classes: 


 PF_PortrayalSpecification 


 PF_PortrayalOperation 


 PF_ParameterSet 


 PF_AttributeValue 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


482  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 PF_AttributeDefinition  (Defined in Portrayal Catalogue Package) 


D.2.9.9 PF_PortrayalSpecification 


This holds instances of the portrayal specification, one for each PF_PortrayalOperation. The symbol 
association role points to each related PF_PortrayalOperation. 


The equivalent entity in GML default style is gml:GeometryStyle class. It contains all the styling specification 
for the geometry of the features selected by the featureConstraint filter. GML also defines the gml:LabelStyle 
class which is responsible for specifying the styling information for the text output. The gml:LabelStyle can be 
used as the value of the gml:labelStyle property within gml:GeometryStyle element. 


gml:GeometryStyle class has the gml:symbol property whose value is an SVG fragment. This value can be 
referenced remotelly or specified inline in the gml:symbol property. The value of the symbol specifies all the 
operations that need to be performed in order to draw the feature in a desired way. 


D.2.9.10 PF_PortrayalOperation 


PF_PortrayalOperation holds the name and description of portrayal operation. 


In GML all portrayal operations are SVG drawing operations. SVG does not provide explicit methods, but 
rather specifies the geometric object and its parameters with the operation part being implicit.   


EXAMPLE If we write in SVG  


<path style="stroke-width:2;fill:none;stroke:brown;" id="" d="M186,479L187,480L190,479L188,477 
onclick="featureClicked('exp:FillEmbankment:', '')"/> 


then we can read this as if we have a method drawPath with the above parameters. 


Thus, PF_PortrayalOperation and classes associated with it through formalParameter and parameterSet 
associations are all defined implicitly in the SVG. 


Explicit function calls in GML Default Style (to map the GML geometry into the SVG geometry) can be done 
however through an XPath expression that generates the SVG.  Note that the ISO 19117 Portrayal 
Specification does not provide any visibility into the mapping between the geographic objects geometry and 
the geometry of the graphic portrayal. 


D.2.9.11 Portrayal of textual data 


In GML Default Style, textual data is portrayed using gml:LabelStyle element. This element can be used in the 
FeatureStyle element in order to portray one label for the whole feature. It can also be, at the same time, spe-
cified inside the gml:GeometryStyle (or gml:TopologyStyle) element to provide a label for different geometry 
(or topology) aspect of the feature. 


While in ISO 19117 textual data can be handled in two ways: as an attribute of a feature or by annotation 
schema, the latter option is not available in the GML default style. 


D.2.9.12 Representation of symbols 


GML default style uses symbols via gml:symbol property of the gml:GeometryStyle element. The property can 
reference a remote symbol or contain it inline as the value. If referenced remotelly, the constraint on reference 
expression is that it be a valid URI. While it is assumed that the symbols will be managed using symbol 
libraries and symbol identifiers, it is not a requirement. Any valid URI that evaluates to a symbol can be used. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 483 
 


 


D.2.9.13 Tabular Comparison 


The UML model of the GML profile defined in this annex describes a conceptual model of the abstract types 
defined in ISO 19117. The Table 15 maps GML default style class and property names to the corresponding 
class names and their attributes in ISO 19117 to simplify comparison with that standard.  


Table 15  


GML construct ISO 19117 construct 


gml:_Style (Abstract Class) Not supported 


gml:defaultStyle (property) portrayed_by  (Role) 


gml:Style (Class) PF_PortrayalCatalogue (Class) 


gml:featureStyle (property) featurePortrayal (Association) 


gml:FeatureStyle (Class) PF_FeaturePortrayal (Class) 


gml:featureType (attribute) definedFor (Association) 


gml:graphStyle (property) Not supported. 


gml:GraphStyle (Class) Not supported. 


gml:featureConstraint (property) portrayalRule (Association) 


gml:geometryStyle (property) portrayalAction (Association) 


gml:GeometryStyle (Class) PF_PortrayalSpecification (Class) 


gml:topologyStyle (property) Not Supported 


gml:TopologyStyle (Class) Not Supported 


gml:labelStyle (property) portrayalAction (Association) 


gml:LabelStyle (Class) PF_PortrayalSpecification (Class) 


gml:spatialResolution (property) Not specified 


gml:symbol (property) parameterSet (Association) 


SVG Object (the value of gml:symbol 
property) 


PF_ParameterSet (Class) 


gml:styleVariation (property) Handled within PF_ParameterSet (Class) 


smil20:animate (property) Not supported 


smil20:animateMotion (property) Not supported 


smil20:animateColor (property) Not supported 


smil20:set (property) Not supported 
 


D.2.9.14 Conformance 


The following table presents the conformance of the GML Default Styling according to the clauses from the 
Abstract Test Suite of the ISO Portrayal specification. The clauses were taken from the ISO 19117:2003(E) 
document. 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


484  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


ISO Abstract Test Suite Clause GML Conformance 


A.1 Portrayal schema 


a) Test purpose: To verify conformance to the portrayal schema. 


b) Test method: Verify that the portrayal specifications and portrayal 
rules are not part of the dataset to be portrayed, and that the portrayal 
specifications are stored separately and referenced from the portrayal 
rules. The portrayal specifications may be stored externally and 
referenced using a universal reference standard like URL. Verify that 
the portrayal rules are stored in a portrayal catalogue, and that the 
portrayal rules are specified for the feature classes they will be applied 
on. Verify that the portrayal rules are expressed using UML. 


YES.  


Portrayal rules are not 
expressed using UML, except 
in the document specification 
of those rules (e.g. XQuery). 


A.2 Availability of portrayal information 


a) Test purpose: Verify that portrayal information is present. 


b) Test method: Verify that portrayal catalogue and portrayal 
specification are present, or referenced from appropriate metadata. 


YES 


A.3 Priority attribute 


a) Test purpose: To verify correct use of priority attributes. 


b) Test method: Verify that all the portrayal rules have a priority 
attribute if priority attributes are used. Verify that if two portrayal rules 
returning TRUE have the same priority value, then the application 
shall decide which one takes precedence. 


Not Applicable  


(Priority attribute not used) 


A.4 Default portrayal specification 


a) Test purpose: To verify that a default portrayal specification is 
present. 


b) Test method: Verify that a default portrayal specification is 
associated with the dataset. 


YES 


In GML the style associated 
with the data set via the 
gml:defaultStyle property is 
the default style. 


A.5 External function 


a) Test purpose: To verify correct use of external functions. 


b) Test method: Verify that the portrayal catalogue lists the external 
functions used, including the parameters and returned values. 


YES. 


Drawing functions are implicit 
in the SVG grammar. 


Other external functions may 
be obtained from the engine 
that processes the query 
language (XQuery), but in 
general is implementation 
dependant. 


 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 485 
 


 


D.2.10 ISO 19123 Coverages 


The UML model of the GML profile defined in this annex describes a conceptual model of the abstract types 
defined in ISO DIS 19123. Table 16 maps GML Coverage object and property names to the corresponding 
class names and their attributes in ISO 19123 to ease the comparison with that standard.  


Table 16  


GML construct ISO 19123 construct 


_Coverage (AbstractCoverageType) CV_Coverage 


boundedBy (property) domainExtent (attribute) 


domainSet (property) domainElement (role name) 


rangeSet (property) rangeElement (role name) 


ValueArray,  


or 


_ScalarValueList 


AttributeValues 


coverageFunction (property) CV_CoverageFunction (Association) 


GridFunction CV_GridValuesMatrix 


sequenceRule (property) sequencingRule (attribute) 


SequenceRuleType CV_SequenceRule 


SequenceRuleNames CV_SequenceType 


incrementOrder (attribute) scanDirection (attribute) 


startPoint (property) startSequence (attribute) 


Grid CV_Grid 


GridEnvelope CV_GridEnvelope 


Low (property) low (attribute) 


high (property) high (attribute) 


RectifiedGrid CV_RectifiedGrid 


or CV_RectifiableGrid 


origin (property) origin (attribute) 


(set of) offsetVector(s) (property) offsetVectors (attribute) 


MultiPointCoverage CV_DiscretePointCoverage 


MultiCurveCoverage CV_DiscreteCurveCoverage 


MultiSurfaceCoverage CV_DiscreteSurfaceCoverage 


GridCoverage 


or 


RectifiedGridCoverage 


CV_DiscreteGridPointCoverage 


 


The following additional changes have been applied to the coverage package of ISO 19123. 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


486  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


Table 17  


Change Rationale 


All subclasses of CV_ContinuousCoverage 
deleted. 


Currently not supported by GML 


Coordinate Reference System association 
deleted from CV_Coverage 


Replaced by srsName (or frame) attributes on the 
Geometry or Temporal objects in the domain. The 
GML coverage package allows for domain objects to 
be in different coordinate reference systems (or 
reference frames) 


CV_CommonPointRule deleted Currently not supported by GML 


AttributeValues deleted Replaced by a choice between the GML analogues: 
ValueArray or _ScalarValueList 


CV_GeometrValuePair deleted Replaced by a choice block consisting of a choice 
between MappingRule or GridFunction 


CV_GridValuesMatrix deleted The mapping between grid points and range values 
including sequence rule, etc. is contained in an object 
(GridFunction) that does not inherit from Grid. 


CV_GridCell Currently not supported by GML 


 


The UML class diagram in Figure 56 illustrates the profile of the Coverage root package (compare with 
Figure 2 of ISO 19123). 


 


 


Figure 56  


The UML class diagram in Figure 57 illustrates the discrete coverages (compare with Figures 3, 4 and 5 of 
ISO 19123). 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 487 
 


 


 


Figure 57  


The rules governing conformance of a profile of ISO 19123 are described in chapter 2 and annex A of ISO 
DIS 19123.  


The conditions of the following conformance clauses are met: 


a. A.1 Simple coverage interface 


b. A.2 Discrete coverage interface  


Note that derived attributes are treated as operations and it is assumed that the derived attributes will be 
derived from the data by the application handling the GML instances. 


D.3 Extension of the profile of the ISO 19100 Harmonized Model used by GML 


D.3.1 Overview 


This section defines the additional parts of GML that are not covered by the profile defined in the previous 
section. UML is used as the conceptual schema language to describe the additional elements in accordance 
with ISO PDTS 19103. For details on the semantics of the additional classes see chapters 7 to 20. 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


488  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


For every XML Schema document that is part of the GML namespace a package of the same name (without 
the .xsd extension) is defined. The required additional classes are defined in each package. The packages 
are part of a package GML. 


D.3.2 Package basicTypes 


In addition to those types from ISO PDTS 19103, the schema basicTypes.xsd defines a number of additional 
types that are used by other GML schemas. 


NullEnumeration
+ inapplicable
+ missing
+ template
+ unknown
+ withheld


<<CodeList>>


Null
+ NullEnumeration
+ URI


<<Union>>


Sign
+ "+"
+ "-"


<<Enumeration>>


booleanOrNull


+ Boolean
+ NullEnumeration
+ URI


<<Union>>
stringOrNull


+ CharacterString
+ NullEnumeration
+ URI


<<Union>>


URI
<<BasicType>>


NameOrNull


+ CharacterString
+ NullEnumeration
+ URI


<<Union>>


doubleOrNull
+ Double
+ NullEnumeration
+ URI


<<Union>>
integerOrNull


+ Integer
+ NullEnumeration
+ URI


<<Union>>


A string value i s restric ted to the pattern  
im plied by the xsd:Name type


MeasureOrNull
+ Measure
+ NullEnumeration
+ URI


<<Union>>


Coordinates


+ decimal [0..1] : CharacterString = " ."
+ cs [0..1] : Charac terString = " ,"
+ ts [0..1] : CharacterString = "&#x20;"


<<DataType>>


CharacterSt ring
<<BasicType>>


 


Figure 58  







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 489 
 


 


D.3.3 Package gmlBase 


The GML Schema gmlBase.xsd does not define additional concepts besides those that are part of the 
mapping from the conceptual schema to the XML Schema implementation (e.g. representation of object types, 
associations, etc.; see annex E for more details). 


D.3.4 Package dictionary 


 
_GML 


+ description [0..1] : StringOrRef 
+ name [0..*] : GenericName 
+ id [0..1] : ID 


(from gmlBase) 


GMLDictionary Definition 
+ id : ID 


0..n 


+dictionaryEntry 


0..n 


Definition 
Proxy 0..n 


+indirectEntry 


0..n 


1 
+definitionRef 


1 


 


Figure 59   


NOTE The Dictionary class had to be named GMLDicitionary to avoid a naming conflict with the class with the 
same name in ISO 19103. 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


490  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


D.3.5 Package units 


UnitDefinition


+ quantityType : CharacterString
+ catalogSymbol [0..1] : GenericName


<<ObjectType>>


Definition
(f rom d ictionary)


<<ObjectType>>


BaseUnit
+ unitsSystem : URI


<<ObjectType>>
DerivedUnit


+ unitDerivation : UnitDerivation


<<ObjectType>>


UnitTerm
+ uom : UnitOfMeasure
+ exponent : Integer


<<DataType>>


Convent ionalUnit


+ conversionToPrefferedUnit : ConversionToPrefferedUnit
+ unitDerivation [0..1] : UnitDerivation


<<Objec tType>>


UnitDerivation


+ unitTerm [1..*] : UnitTerm


<<DataType>>


ConversionToPrefferedUnit


+ uom : UnitOfMeasure
+ factorOrFormula : factorOrFormula


<<DataType>>


FactorOrFormula


+ factor : Real
+ formula : Formula


<<Union>>


Formula


+ a [0. .1]  :  Real
+ b : Real
+ c : Real
+ d [0. .1]  :  Real


<<DataType>>


 


Figure 60  


D.3.6 Package measures 


Measure


GridLength


 


Figure 61  







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 491 
 


 


AngleChoice


+ Angle
+ DMSAngle


<<Union>>
DMSAngle


+ degrees : Degrees
+ minutes [0..1]  : Minutes


<<DataType>>


Minutes


+ DecimalMinutes
+ MinutesSeconds


<<Union>>


MinutesSeconds


+ minutes :  Integer
+ seconds [0..1] : Dec imal


<<Union>>


Degrees
+ degreeValue : Integer
+ degreeDirection : DegreeDirection


<<DataType>>


DegreeDirect ion
+ N
+ E
+ S
+ W
+ +
+ -


<<Enumeration>>


{degreeValue >=0 and 
degreeValue<=359}


{minutes >=0 and 
degreeValue<=59 and
seconds>=0.0 and
seconds<60.0}


{minutes>=0.0 and
minutes<60.0}


DecimalMinutes
+ minutes : Decimal


<<DataType>>


 


Figure 62  







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


492  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


D.3.7 Package geometryBasic0d01 


GM_Curve
(from Geometric primitive)


<<Type>>


LineSt ring segment->forAll( oclIsKindOf(GM_LineString) )


 


Figure 63   


An additional subtype of GM_Curve is added in GML. LineString is a special curve that consists of only 
GM_LineString segments. The XML representation of the LineString object element joins all the segments 
into one segment and its control points are represented as direct properties of the LineString. 


D.3.8 Package geometryBasic2d 


Polygon


GM_Surface
(from Geometric primitive)


<<Type>>


patch->size = 1 and
patch->forAll( oclIsKindOf(GM_Polygon) )


LinearRing


LineString
(from geometryBasic0d1d)


controlPoints->size >= 4 and
controlPoints[1] = controlPoint[controlPoints->size]


 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 493 
 


 


Figure 64   


An additional subtype of GM_Surface is added in GML. Polygon is a special surface that consists of a single 
GM_Polygon patch. Since only a single patch exists, the XML representation of the Polygon object element 
skips the patch level and the exterior and interior boundary properties of the patch are represented as direct 
properties of the Polygon. 


In a similar way, LinearRing is a simple ring (a GM_Ring represented by a single line string). 


D.3.9 Package geometryPrimitives 


GM_CurveSegment


+ interpolation : GM_CurveInterpolat ion = " linear"
+ numDerivativesAtStart[0..1] : Integer = 0
+ numDerivativesAtEnd[0..1] : Integer = 0
+ numDerivativeInterior[0. .1]  :  Integer = 0


(from Geometric primitive)


<<Abst ract>>


ArcByCenterPoint


+ controlPoint : GM_PointArray
+ radius : Length
+ startAngle [0..1] : Angle
+ endAngle [0..1] : Angle


<<DataType>>


interpolation = "circularArcCenterPointWithRadius"
CircleByCenterPoint


<<DataType>>


Rectangle


+ boundary : GM_SurfaceBoundary


GM_SurfacePatch


+ interpolation : GM_SurfaceInterpolation = "planar"
+ numDerivativesOnBoundary[0..1] : Integer = 0


(from Geometric primitive)


<<Abstract>>


boundary.interior->isEmpty and
boundary.exterior.oclIsKindOf(LinearRing)


 


Figure 65   


The curve segments ArcByCenterPoint and CircleByCenterPoint as well as the surface patch Rectangle 
have been defined in GML. 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


494  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


D.3.10 Package geometryAggregates 


GM_Aggregate
(from Geometric aggregates)


<<Type>>


MultiGeometry


 


Figure 66   


GML defines a instantiable geometric aggregate which is not restricted to elements of a single dimension: 
MultiGeometry. 


D.3.11 Package geometryComplexes 


No additional definitions required. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 495 
 


 


D.3.12 Package topology 


TP_Expression
(from  Topological primitive)


<<DataType>>


TopoPoint
<<DataType>>


TopoCurve
<<DataType>>


TopoSurface
<<DataType>>


TopoVolume
<<DataType>>


term->forAll( 
  variable.oclIsKindOf(
    TP_DirectedNode )


term->forAll( 
  variable.oclIsKindOf(
    TP_DirectedEdge )


term->forAll( 
  variable.oclIsKindOf(
    TP_DirectedFace )


term->forAll( 
  variable.oclIsKindOf(
    TP_DirectedSolid )


 


Figure 67   


GML defines several data types containing (or referencing) directed topological primitives, one per dimension: 
TopoPoint, TopoCurve, TopoSurface and TopoVolume. These are intended to be used in properties of 
features. 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


496  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


D.3.13 Package direction 


Direction
+ DirectionVector
+ CompassPoint
+ DirectionKeyword
+ DirectionString


<<Union>>


DirectionString
+ direct ionString : CharacterString


<<DataType>>


DirectionVectorByAngle
+ horizontalAngle : Angle
+ verticalAngle : Angle


<<DataType>>
DirectionVector


+ Vector
+ DirectionVectorByAngle


<<Union>>


CompassPoint
+ N
+ NNE
+ NE
+ ENE
+ E
+ ESE
+ SE
+ SSE
+ S
+ SSW
+ SW
+ WSW
+ W
+ WNW
+ NW
+ NNW


<<Enumeration>>


DirectionKeyword


+ directionKeyword : GenericName


<<DataType>>


 


Figure 68  


D.3.14 Package valueObjects 


Value


+ _Value
+ GM_Object
+ TM_Object
+ Null
+ Measure


<<Union>>


 


Figure 69  







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 497 
 


 


_ScalarValue
<<DataTy pe>>


BooleanValue


+ v alue : Boolean


Category Value


+ v alue : GenericName


Quantity Value


+ v alue : Measure


CountValue


+ v alue : Integer


_Value
<<D at aTy pe>>


 


Figure 70  


_ScalarValueList
<<DataTy pe>>


BooleanList


+ v alue : sequence<BooleanOrNull>


CategoryList


+ v alue : sequence<GenericNameOrNull>


Quantity List


+ v alue : sequence<MeasureOrNull>


CountList


+ v alue : sequence<Integer>


_Value
<<DataTy pe>>


 


Figure 71  







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


498  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


_Value
<<DataType>>


CompositeValue
<<DataType>>


Value


+ _Value
+ GM_Object
+ TM_Object
+ Null
+ Measure


<<Union>>


0..*


+valueComponent


0..*


ValueArray
+ uom [0..1] : UnitOfMeasure
+ scope [0..1] : Namespace


<<DataType>>
{count(uom) + 
count(scope) = 1}


components 
must be 
homogenous


 


Figure 72  


_Value
<<DataType>>


QuantityExtent


+ value : sequence<MeasureOrNull>


<<DataType>>


Length of sequence shall be 2


CategoryExtent
+ value : sequence<GenericNameOrNull>


<<DataType>>


CountExtent


+ value : sequence<IntegerOrNull>


<<DataType>>


 


Figure 73  


D.3.15 Package temporal 


No additional definitions required. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 499 
 


 


D.3.16 Package dynamicFeature 


DynamicFeature


_Feature


+ location [0..1] : Location
+ boundedBy [0..1] : BoundingShape


(from feature) FeatureCollection
(from feature)


DynamicFeatureCollection


DynamicProperties


+ timeStamp [0..1] : TM_Primitive
+ history [0..1] : _TimeSlice
+ dataSource [0..1] : StringOrRef


<<DataType>>


 


Figure 74   


_TimeSlice


+ timeStamp : TM_Primitive
+ dataSource [0..1] : StringOrRef


_GML


+ description [0..1] : StringOrRef
+ name [0..*] : GenericName
+ id [0..1] : ID


(from gmlBase)


MovingObjectStatus
+ location : Locator
+ speed [0..1] : Measure
+ bearing [0..1] : Direction
+ acceleration [0..1] : Measure
+ elevation [0..1] : Measure
+ status [0..1] : StringOrRef


 


Figure 75   







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


500  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


D.3.17 Package feature 


_FeatureCollection


+ featureMember [0..*] : ANY


<<FeatureType>>


FeatureCollection
<<FeatureType>>


If set, the value of "featureMember" shall be 
an instance of a class that is a realization of 
GF_FeatureType.


 


Figure 76  


Beside the definition of the feature collection type, the GML Schema feature.xsd does not define additional 
concepts besides those that are part of the mapping from the conceptual schema to the XML Schema 
implementation (representation of feature types and their predefined properties; see annex E for more details). 


D.3.18 Package observation 


Observation


+ validTime : TM_Instant
+ using [0..1] : ANY
+ target [0..1] : ANY
+ resultOf : ANY


<<FeatureType>> If set, the value of "using" shall be an instance 
of a class that is a realization of 
GF_FeatureType.


If set, the value of "target" shall be an 
instance of a class that is a realization of 
GF_FeatureType or a subtype of GM_Object.


DirectedObservation


+ direction : Direction


<<FeatureType>>


DirectedObservationAtDistance


+ distance : Length


<<FeatureType>>


 


Figure 77  


D.3.19 Package grids 


See clause D.2.10. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 501 
 


 


D.3.20 Package coverage 


See clause D.2.10. 


D.3.21 Packages coordinateOperations, coordinateReferenceSystems, 
coordinateSystems, dataQuality, datums, referenceSystems 


See clause D.2.6. 


D.3.22 Package defaultStyle 


See clause D.2.9. 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


502  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


Annex E 
(normative) 


 
UML-to-GML Application Schema Encoding Rules 


E.1 General concepts 


The mapping from an ISO 19109 conformant UML Application Schema to the corresponding GML Application 
Schema is based on a set of encoding rules. These encoding rules are compliant with the rules for GML 
Application Schemas and are based on ISO DIS 19118.  


The rules are derived from the current rules for the GML model and syntax as described in clauses 7 to 23, 
especially clause 7. The (currently informative) encoding rules of ISO DIS 19118 Annex A are used whenver 
possible and feasible. 


The rules listed in this clause (and the subsequent clause E.2) aim at an automatic mapping from an ISO DIS 
19109 / ISO PDTS 19103 conformant UML application schema to a GML Application Schema (according to 
the rules defined in chapter 23). As a result of this automation, the resulting GML Applciation Schema will not 
make full use of the capabilities of XML and XML Schema.  


These rules do not prescribe that all GML Application Schemas shall be generated by using these rules. All 
schemas following the rules defined in chapter 23 are valid and conformant GML Application Schemas, 
whether they are handcrafted, automatically derived from an UML application schema or by some other 
means.  


The schema encoding rules are based on the general idea that the class definitions in the application schema 
are mapped to type and element declarations in XML Schema, so that the objects in the instance model can 
be mapped to corresponding element structures in the XML document. 


E.2 Encoding Rules 


E.2.1 General encoding requirements 


E.2.1.1 Application schema 


To be a valid input into the mapping the UML Application Schema shall conform to all of the following rules. 
See ISO DIS 19118 A.2.1 for additional requirements. 


E.2.1.1.1 General (Application Schema, Packages) 


The UML Application Schema shall conform to the rules defined in ISO DIS 19109 and ISO PDTS 19103. 


The UML Application Schema shall be represented by a package with the stereotype <<Application 
Schema>>. This package shall contain (i.e. own directly or indirectly) all UML model elements to be mapped 
to object types in the GML Application Schema. The UML model shall be complete and not contain external 
references unless exceptions are explicitly stated below. This allows that predefined classes may be imported 
from the standardized schemas of the ISO 19100 Harmonized Model. 


All package names shall be unique. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 503 
 


 


Dependencies between packages shall be modelled explicitly. Permission elements with stereotype 
<<import>> or unspecified dependency elements between packages shall be used to express the dependency 
of elements in a package from elements in another package. All other dependency elements shall be ignored. 


Parcels
<<Application Schema>>


Geodetic Points
<<Application Schema>>


Buildings
<<Leaf>>


 


Figure 78  Dependency between packages 


The visibility of all UML elements shall be set correctly. Only publicly visible elements shall be part of 
Application Schemas used for data interchange between applications. 


Documentation of the elements in the UML model shall be stored in tagged values documentation. 


An XML namespace shall be associated with each package and its sub-packages may be specified by a 
tagged value (tag name xmlNamespace for the URI, tag name xmlNamespaceAbbreviation for the 
abbreviation). These tagged values shall be set for the UML Application Schema package. If they are not set, 
default values shall be used. 


The version of a package, if applicable, shall be specified in a tagged value version. 


E.2.1.1.2 Classes 


All class names within the same XML namespace shall be unique. 


Feature types shall be modelled as UML classes with stereotype <<FeatureType>>5.  


Object types shall be modelled as UML classes with stereotype <<ObjectType>>. Object types are types 
where the instances shall have an identity, but which are not feature types6. 


EXAMPLE Examples of such types are geometries, topologies, reference systems. Instances of these types can 
have, for example, a name and an identifier. 
                                                      


5  Note that it will be easier to identify feature types in UML Application Schemas, if such classes will be tagged with 
such a stereotype <<FeatureType>>. ISO DIS 19109 currently does not support this stereotype, it is recommended to add 
such a support in a technical amendment to ISO 19109. 


6  Object types are not considered explicitly in ISO DIS 19109. They appear only as value types of property types. 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


504  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


Abstract object or feature types may have the stereotype <<Abstract>>, but shall be marked as an abstract 
class (i.e. the UML meta model property isAbstract of the class is true). The <<Abstract>> stereotype 
therefore is equivalent to no stereotype.  


The same is true for the stereotype <<Leaf>> and classes that are marked as leaf types (i.e. the UML meta 
model property isLeaf of the class is true; no subtypes allowed). 


Building


+ extent : GM_Surface
+ address : Address
+ type : BuildingType


<<FeatureType>>


 


Figure 79  A feature type 


Abstract types shall be modelled as UML classes with stereotype <<Interface>> or <<Type>>7. They may 
have zero or more operations (these are not mapped to the GML Application Schema), attributes or 
associations. These classes shall be marked as abstract (the UML meta model property isAbstract of the 
class is true).  


All subtypes of abstract types shall be either feature, object types or data types. 


Data types shall be modelled as UML classes with stereotype <<DataType>>. 


ParcelName
+ CountryId : CharacterString
+ StateId : CharacterString
+ MunicipalityId : CharacterString
+ ParcelIdPrefix : CharacterString
+ ParcelIdSuffix [0..1] : CharacterString


<<DataType>>


 


Figure 80  A data type 


Enumerations shall be modelled as UML classes with stereotype <<Enumeration>>. 


Code lists shall be modelled as UML classes with stereotype <<CodeList>>. 


                                                      


7  See ISO PDTS 19103 for a discussion of these stereotypes. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 505 
 


 


ParcelUsage


+ factory = 1
+ road = 2
+ residential = 3
+ offices = 4
+ sea, river = 5
+ ...


<<CodeList>>


 


Figure 81  A code list 


Union types shall be modelled as UML classes with stereotype <<Union>>8. 


UML classes of the ISO 19100 Harmonized Model that are part of the GML profile of the Harmonized Model 
may be subclassed in the UML Application Schema. Redefinition of  properties is not allowed, only the 
extension of these classes (i.e. additional properties can be added). 


All classes with other stereotypes than those mentioned above may be part of the UML Application Schema, 
but will be ignored. 


Generalization relationships are allowed only between  


 feature types and features types, 


 object types and object types, or 


 data types and data types.  
 


These generalizations shall have no stereotype. All generalization relationships with other stereotypes will be 
ignored. The discriminator property of the UML generalization shall be blank. 


If a class is a specialization of another class, then this class shall have only one supertype (no support for 
multiple inheritance). 


All classes shall have a stereotype specifying the meaning of the class. Classes without a stereotype are 
treated as feature types9. 


                                                      


8  Note that <<Union>> is currently not defined in ISO PDTS 19103 anymore. However, since this stereotype is used 
quite frequently in ISO 19100 models, it is supported by these encoding rules. The same is true for <<BasicType>>. 


9  If ISO 19109 is amended as proposed above, the default interpretation should be changed to object type. 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


506  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


LandClassification


+ featureMetadata : MD_Metadata
+ extent : GM_Surface


<<FeatureType>>


Fore st


+ type : ForestTypeEnumeration


<<FeatureType>>
Lake


+ depth [0..1] : Length


<<FeatureType>>
...


 


Figure 82  Generalization relationship between feature types 


E.2.1.1.3 Attributes 


Every UML attribute of an abstract type, feature type, object type, data type or union type shall have a name 
and a type. If its multiplicity is not 1, the multiplicity shall be specified explicitly. An initial value may be 
specified for attributes with a number, string or enumeration type. 


The type shall either be a predefined type (see clause E.2.1.1.5) or a class defined in the UML model. An 
attribute with a type that is a feature or object type is treated like an association navigable only towards the 
association end of the target type.  


Every UML attribute of an enumeration class shall have a name. The type information is left empty. No 
multiplicity, ordering or initial value information shall be attached to the attribute. 


Every UML attribute of a code list class shall have a name. The type information is left empty. No multiplicity 
or ordering information shall be attached to the attribute. An initial value may be specified to document a code 
for the code list value. If it is omitted, the value (i.e. the attribute name) is used as the code.  


E.2.1.1.4 Associations and association ends 


Every UML association shall be an association with exactly two association ends. Both association ends shall 
connect to a feature or data type and shall have no stereotype or the stereotype <<association>> (or the 
whole association will be ignored). 


The rules for association ends are: 


 If an association end is navigable it shall be marked as such and shall have a name. An association end 
with no name shall be ignored, even if it marked as navigable. 


 If the multiplicity of an association end is not 0..*, the multiplicity shall be given explicitly. 


 The aggregation kind shall be specified explicitly if it is not none. 


 If the target class of an association end is a data type, then the aggregation kind shall be composition. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 507 
 


 


0..*


Person


+ firstName : CharacterString
+ lastName : CharacterString


<<FeatureType>>


+owner 1..*


0..*


1..*


+owns 0..*


Parcel
+ area : Area
+ extent : GM_Surface


<<FeatureType>>


0..*


+hasBuilding
Building


+ extent : GM_Surface
+ address : Address
+ type : BuildingType


<<FeatureType>>


 


Figure 83  Associations 


E.2.1.1.5 Predefined Types 


The following predefined types from ISO PDTS 19103 are treated as basic types in the sense of ISO DIS 
19118 Annex A (i.e. a canonical XML Encoding is attached to them). These basic types are assumed to be 
pre-defined basic types and shall not be explicitly defined in the UML model: 


 Character 


 CharacterString 


 Integer 


 Real 


 Decimal 


 Number 


 Vector 


 Date 


 Time 


 DateTime 


 Boolean 


 Sign 


 Fraction 


 GenericName 


 LocalName 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


508  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 ScopedName 


 Length 


 Distance 


 Angle 


 Velocity 


 Scale 


 Area 


 Volume 


 Measure 


 UnitOfMeasure 


 


E.2.1.1.6 OCL Constraints 


All OCL constraints are ignored. The assessment of the validity of the instance model with respect to these 
constraints is the task of the application processing the GML instances. 


NOTE The Schematron language may be used to express OCL constraints as part of the XML Schema representing 
the GML Application Schema. 


E.2.1.1.7 Other information 


All other information in the UML Application Schema is not used in the encoding rules and is ignored. 


E.2.1.2 Character repertoire and languages 


UTF-8 shall be used as the character encoding of the XML Schema files (with the associated character 
repertoire) in accordance with the XML specification. 


E.2.1.3 Exchange metadata 


Exchange metadata can be specified for every Feature or Feature Collection in a GML instance document (by 
using the gml:metaDataProperty element and the ISO 19139 XML Schema implementation specification of 
ISO 19115). No specific schema for the exchange metadata is added to the GML application schema. 


E.2.1.4 Dataset and object identification 


Unique identifiers according to XML's ID mechanism are used to identify objects. 


E.2.1.5 Update mechanism  


No explicit update mechanism is defined for the features defined in the GML Application Schema. It is 
assumed that other mechanisms are used to update a data store. 


NOTE An example is the Transaction operation of the OpenGIS Web Feature Service Implementation 
Specification. 


E.2.2 Input data structure 


See ISO DIS 19118 A.3 for a description of the input data structure. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 509 
 


 


E.2.3 Output data structure 


This encoding rule is based on the XML Recommendation 1.0 and the XML Linking Language (XLink) Version 
1.0. The schema for the output data structure that governs the structure of the exchange format shall be a (set 
of) valid XML Schema(s) according to XML Schema 1.0 and the Rules for Application Schemas (see clause 
23). 


The XML Schema conversion rules are defined in the following clause. 


E.2.4 Conversion rules 


E.2.4.1 General concepts 


The schema conversion rules define how XML Schema documents (XSDs) shall be derived from an ISO 
19109 application schema expressed in UML. A number of general rules are defined in the following clauses 
to describe the mapping from an UML model that follows the guidelines described in the previous clause. 


NOTE In this annex the namespace "xsd:" is used to refer to the namespace of XML Schema, which is 
"http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema". The namespace gml: refers to the namespace of GML, which is 
http://www.opengis.net/gml. 


The rules are based on the current rules for the GML model and syntax as described in clauses 7 to 23 
(especially clauses 7, 8 and 23) and also on the encoding rules of ISO DIS 19118 Annex A. 


The schema encoding rules are based on the general idea that the class definitions in the UML application 
schema are mapped to type and element declarations in XML Schema, so that the objects in the instance 
model can be mapped to corresponding element structures in the XML document. 


The following table gives an overview: 


Table 18   Schema encoding overview 


Table: UML  GML Application Schema Overview 


UML Application Schema GML Application Schema 


Package One XML Schema document per package (default mapping) 


<<DataType>> complexType, property type and global element 


<<Enumeration>> Restriction of xsd:string with enumeration values 


<<CodeList>> Union of an enumeration and a pattern (default mapping, an alternative mapping is a reference to a dictionary)  


<<Union>> Choice group whose members are GML Objects or Features, or objects corresponding to DataTypes 


<<ObjectType>> Direct/indirect extension of gml:AbstractGMLType, property 
type & global element 


<<FeatureType>> Direct/indirect extension of gml:AbstractFeatureType, property type & global element 


No stereotype Direct/indirect extension of gml:AbstractFeatureType, property type & global element 


<<Type>> Direct/indirect extension of gml:AbstractGMLType, property type & global element 


Operations Not encoded 


Attribute local xsd:element, the type is either a property type (if the type is a complex type) or a simple type. 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


510  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


Association role local xsd:element, the type is always a property type (only named and navigable roles) 


General OCL constraints Not encoded 


 


The multiplicity of attributes and association roles is mapped to minOccurs and maxOccurs attributes in 
<xsd:element> declarations. The detailled mapping rules are described below. 


E.2.4.2 UML Packages 


The default mapping is that one XML Schema file is generated per package. Name and XML namespace are 
determined by the name and  if set  the tagged values of the package (see E.2.1). Alternatively, several 
packages may be mapped to the same XML Schema file. All packages shall be associated with the same 
XML namespace. 


The schema file contains all the XML Schema definitions resulting from the UML classes directly owned by the 
package(s). 


The dependencies of the packages and the package hierarchy are used to determine the required imports and 
includes of other XML Schema files. 


The following tagged values of packages are evaluated: 


 xmlNamespace and xmlNamespaceAbbreviation  URI (e.g. http://www.myorg.com/myns) and 
abbreviation (e.g. myns) of the target namespace of the XML Schema document. 


 version  version attribute of the root element of the XML Schema document (default unknown). 
 


EXAMPLE Mapping the information from Figure 78 may result in: 


<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
<schema targetNamespace="http://www.myorg.com/parcels" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" 
xmlns:gml="http://www.opengis.net/gml" xmlns:gp="http://www.myorg.com/geodeticPoints" 
xmlns:pcl="http://www.myorg.com/parcels" xmlns:iso19115="http://www.isotc211.org/iso19115/" 
xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink" elementFormDefault="qualified" version="2003-07-20"> 
 <include schemaLocation="Buildings.xsd"/> 
 <import namespace="http://www.myorg.com/geodeticPoints" schemaLocation="GeodeticPoints.xsd"/> 
 <import namespace="http://www.opengis.net/gml" schemaLocation="base/gml3.xsd"/> 
 <!--  --> 
</schema> 
 


E.2.4.3 UML Classes (general rules) 


Allowed stereotypes for UML classes are: no stereotype, <<FeatureType>>, <<ObjectType>>, <<Type>>, 
<<DataType>>, <<Union>>, <<Abstract>>, <<CodeList>>, <<Enumeration>>, <<Leaf>>, <<Interface>>. All 
classes will be mapped to the corresponding class category. All UML classes with other stereotypes will be 
ignored. 


All UML classes shall have zero or one supertype. 


All UML classes are mapped to named types. A suffix Type is added to the name of the type. 


E.2.4.4 UML Classes (basic types) 


The following basic types from the ISO PDTS 19103 profile of GML are predefined and can be referenced in 
an UML Application Schema. The mapping to a built-in type of XML Schema (xsd:) or GML (gml:) is 
specified. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 511 
 


 


 CharacterString  xsd:string 


 Integer  xsd:integer 


 Real  xsd:double 


 Decimal  xsd:double 


 Number  xsd:double 


 Vector  gml:VectorType  


 Date  xsd:date 


 Time  xsd:time 


 DateTime  xsd:dateTime 


 Boolean  xsd:boolean 


 GenericName  gml:CodeType 


 LocalName  gml:CodeType 


 ScopedName  gml:CodeType 


 Length  gml:LengthType 


 Distance  gml:LengthType 


 Angle  gml:AngleType 


 Velocity  gml:SpeedType 


 Scale  gml:ScaleType 


 Area  gml:AreaType 


 Volume  gml:VolumeType 


 Measure  gml:MeasureType 


 Sign  gml:SignType 


 UnitOfMeasure  gml:UnitOfMeasureType 
 


In addition, the following predefined can be referenced in the UML Application Schema and are mapped to a 
built-in type of XML Schema (xsd:) or GML (gml:) as follows: 


 booleanOrNull  gml:booleanOrNull 


 sequence<booleanOrNull>  gml:booleanOrNullList 


 stringOrNull  gml:stringOrNull 


 sequence<stringOrNull>  gml:stringOrNullList 


 NameOrNull  gml:NameOrNull 


 sequence<NameOrNull>  gml:NameOrNullList 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


512  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 doubleOrNull  gml:doubleOrNull 


 sequence<DoubleOrNull>  gml:doubleOrNullList 


 integerOrNull  gml:integerOrNull 


 sequence<integerOrNull>  gml:integerOrNullList 


 measureOrNull  gml:MeasureOrNull 


 sequence<measureOrNull>  gml:MeasureOrNullList 


 Coordinates  gml:CoordinatesType 


 Null  gml:NullType 
 


E.2.4.4 UML Classes (data types) 


UML classes with stereotype <<DataType>> are mapped to XML Schema complex types. If the class has not 
supertype it is a non-derived type in XML Schema, otherwise it extends its supertype which shall not be 
derived from gml:AbstractGMLType (directly or indirectly). Abstract superclasses without any attribute or 
navigable association role are ignored. 


Global XML elements with appropriate settings for name (name of the UML class), type (name of the UML 
class plus Type), abstractness (if the class is abstract) and substiution groups (the name of the superclass) 
may be defined for these classes. 


A named complex type shall be created for these classes (carrying the name of the class with a 
PropertyType suffix). The type follows the pattern for association properties as defined in GML (see clause 
7.5.3), but without allowing Xlink attributes. 


 


EXAMPLE 


 <complexType name="PoleinfoType"> 
  <sequence> 
   <element name="height" type="gml:LengthType"/> 
   <element name="measurementDate" type="date"/> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 
an optionally 
 
 <element name="Poleinfo" type="ex:PoleinfoType"/> 
 <complexType name="PoleinfoPropertyType"> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="ex:Poleinfo"/> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 
or 
 
 <complexType name="PoleinfoPropertyType"> 
  <sequence> 


 <element name="Poleinfo" type="ex:PoleinfoType"/> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 513 
 


 


E.2.4.5 UML Classes (feature types) 


UML classes with stereotype <<FeatureType>>, without stereotype or one of the stereotypes <<Abstract>>/ 
<<Interface>> derive directly or indirectly from gml:AbstractFeatureType. If the class is a class without 
supertype it extends directly gml:AbstractFeatureType, otherwise it extends its supertype which shall be 
derived from gml:AbstractFeatureType (again, directly or indirectly). 


There is one special case: A feature type with no supertype and exactly one aggregation or composition to 
another class may be mapped to a feature collection (i.e. become a restriction of 
gml:AbstractFeatureCollectionType). In this case, the association role shall be defined as substitutable for 
gml:featureMember. The name of the global element would be a combination of the class and the property 
name to guarantee uniqueness in the XML namespace. 


 Global XML elements with appropriate settings for name (name of the UML class), type (name of the UML 
class plus Type), abstractness (true, if the class is abstract) and substiution group (the name of the 
supertype or gml:_Feature) are defined for these classes. 


 A named complex type may be created for these classes (carrying the name of the class with a 
PropertyType suffix). The type follows the pattern for association properties as defined in GML (see 
clause 7.5.3). 


 A named complex type may be created for these classes (carrying the name of the class with a 
PropertyByValueType suffix). The type is a profile of the pattern for association properties as defined in 
GML restricted to the by value form (again, see clause 7.5.3). 


 


EXAMPLE Mapping Building from Figure 79 may be mapped to: 


<complexType name="BuildingType"> 
 <complexContent> 
  <extension base="gml:AbstractFeatureType"> 
   <sequence> 
    <element name="extent" type="gml:SurfacePropertyType"/> 
    <element name="address" type="pcl:AddressPropertyType"/> 
    <element name="type" type="pcl:BuildingTypeType"/> 
   </sequence> 
  </extension> 
 </complexContent> 
</complexType> 
 
<complexType name="BuildingPropertyType"> 
 <sequence> 
  <element ref="pcl:Building" minOccurs="0"/> 
 </sequence> 
 <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
</complexType> 
 
<complexType name="BuildingPropertyByValueType"> 
 <sequence> 
  <element ref="pcl:Building"/> 
 </sequence> 
</complexType> 
 
<element name="Building" type="pcl:BuildingType" substitutionGroup="gml:_Feature"/> 
 


E.2.4.6 UML Classes (object types) 


UML classes with stereotype <<ObjectType>> or <<Type>> derive directly or indirectly from 
gml:AbstractGMLType. If the class is a class without supertype it extends directly gml:AbstractGMLType, 
otherwise it extends its supertype which shall be derived from gml:AbstractGMLType (again, directly or 
indirectly), but not from gml:AbstractFeatureType (again, directly or indirectly). 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


514  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


 Global XML elements with appropriate settings for name (name of the UML class), type (name of the UML 
class plus Type), abstractness (true, if the class is abstract) and substiution group (the name of the 
supertype or gml_GML) are defined for these classes. 


 A named complex type may be created for these classes (carrying the name of the class with a 
PropertyType suffix). The type follows the pattern for association properties as defined in GML (see 
clause 7.5.3). 


 A named complex type may be created for these classes (carrying the name of the class with a 
PropertyByValueType suffix). The type is a profile of the pattern for association properties as defined in 
GML restricted to the by value form (again, see clause 7.5.3). 


 
 
EXAMPLE  


<element name="Ellipse" type="ex:EllipseType" substitutionGroup="gml:_CurveSegment"/> 
 


 <complexType name="EllipseType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCurveSegmentType"> 


   <sequence> 
     <element name="center" type="gml:DirectPosition"/> 
     <element name="semiminor" type="gml:VectorType"/> 
     <element name="semimajor" type="gml:VectorType"/> 


   </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
 


E.2.4.7 UML Classes (enumerations) 


UML classes with stereotype <<Enumeration>> are mapped to XML Schema simple types. The base type is 
string, the domain of values is restricted to the allowed set of literal values as specified by the attribute 
names of the UML class. 


EXAMPLE  


 <simpleType name="SignType"> 
  <restriction base="string"> 
   <enumeration value="-"/> 
   <enumeration value="+"/> 
  </restriction> 
 </simpleType> 
 


E.2.4.8 UML Classes (code lists) 


UML classes with stereotype <<CodeList>> are  in principle  mapped like enumerations, but with an added 
value (<pattern value=other: \w{2,}/>) that allows for any text value beside the predefined values; these free 
values are prefixed with other: . 


If codes are specified for code list values, either only the code or both the code and the text value shall be 
represented as enumerated values. 


An encoded code value shall be qualified with an appinfo annotation (source urn:x-gml:codelistValue) 
specifying the text value of the enumerated value. 


EXAMPLE The code list ParcelUsage from Figure 81 may be represented as: 


<simpleType name="ParcelUsageType"> 
 <union memberTypes="pcl:ParcelUsageEnumerationType pcl: ParcelUsageOtherType"/> 
</simpleType> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 515 
 


 


<simpleType name="ParcelUsageEnumerationType"> 
 <restriction base="string"> 
  <enumeration value="1"> 


  <annotation> 
  <appinfo source=urn:x-gml:codelistValue>factory </appinfo> 


  </annotation> 
  </enumeration> 
  <enumeration value="2"> 


  <annotation> 
  <appinfo source=urn:x-gml:codelistValue>road</appinfo> 


  </annotation> 
  </enumeration> 
  <enumeration value="3"> 


  <annotation> 
  <appinfo source=urn:x-gml:codelistValue>residential</appinfo> 


  </annotation> 
  </enumeration> 
  <enumeration value="4"> 


  <annotation> 
  <appinfo source=urn:x-gml:codelistValue>offices</appinfo> 


  </annotation> 
  </enumeration> 
  <enumeration value="5"> 


  <annotation> 
  <appinfo source=urn:x-gml:codelistValue>sea, river</appinfo> 


  </annotation> 
  </enumeration> 
  <enumeration value="factory"/> 
  <enumeration value="road"/> 
  <enumeration value="residential"/> 
  <enumeration value="offices"/> 
  <enumeration value="sea, river"/> 
 </restriction> 
</simpleType> 
<simpleType name="ParcelUsageOtherType"> 
 <restriction base="string"> 
  <pattern value="other: \w{2,}"/> 
 </restriction> 
</simpleType> 
 
Alternatively, gml:Dictionaries can be used to represent code lists.  


E.2.4.9 UML Classes (unions) 


UML classes with stereotype <<Union>> are mapped as XML Schema complex types. These classes are 
mapped like data types (see E.2.4.4), but instead of a <xsd:sequence> of the properties, a <xsd:choice> is 
used so that exactly one of the properties can be specified in an instance of an union. 


EXAMPLE  


 <complexType name="RemoteResourceType"> 
  <choice> 
   < element name="name" type="string"/> 
   < element name="uri" type="anyURI"/> 
  </choice> 
 </complexType> 
 


E.2.4.10 UML Attributes and Association roles 


An UML attribute or association role of an object or feature type is mapped to a local element with the same 
name in the complex type defining the content model of the object or feature type. The minOccurs and 
maxOccurs attributes are set according to the definitions in the UML model (see ISO DIS 19118 Annex A for 
details of the mapping). The type depends on the type of the value of the property in UML:  







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


516  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


If the type of the value of the property is of simple content, then the type is used directly.  


EXAMPLE <element name="count" type="integer"/> 
 
If the type of the value of the property is of complex content, then a property type shall be used. The default 
encoding of the property type allows both the by-value or by-reference representation.  


If the encoded property is an association end and the other association end of the association is also encoded 
in the GML Application Schema, the property name of the other association end shall be encoded in another 
appinfo annotation (source urn:x-gml:reverseProperty). 


EXAMPLE By-reference or by-value: 
 
<element name="owner" type="ex:PersonPropertyType" minOccurs=0> 
 <annotation> 


 <appinfo source=urn:x-gml:reverseProperty>owns</appinfo> 
 </annotation> 
</element> 
<complexType name="PersonPropertyType"> 
 <sequence> 
  <element ref="ex:Person" minOccurs="0"/> 
 </sequence> 
 <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
</complexType> 
 
or 
 
<element name="owner" minOccurs=0> 
 <annotation> 


 <appinfo source=urn:x-gml:reverseProperty>owns</appinfo> 
 </annotation> 


<complexType> 
 <sequence> 
  <element ref="ex:Person" minOccurs="0"/> 
 </sequence> 
 <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
</complexType> 


</element> 
 
Alternatively, the property type may support only one of the representations, by-value or by-reference.  


EXAMPLE By-value only: 
 
<element name="owner" type="ex:PersonPropertyByValueType" minOccurs=0/> 
<complexType name="PersonPropertyByValueType"> 
 <sequence> 
  <element ref="ex:Person"/> 
 </sequence> 
</complexType> 
 
or 
 
<element name="owner" minOccurs=0> 


<complexType> 
 <sequence> 
  <element ref="ex:Person"/> 
 </sequence> 
</complexType> 


</element> 
 
If only the by-reference representation shall be supported, then the property element shall be qualified with an 
appinfo annotation (source urn:x-gml:targetElement) specifying the qualified element name of the target 
type.  







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 517 
 


 


If the encoded property is an association end and the other association end of the association is also encoded 
in the GML Application Schema, the property name of the other association end shall be encoded in another 
appinfo annotation (source urn:x-gml:reverseProperty). 


EXAMPLE By-reference only: 
 
<element name="owner" type="gml:ReferenceType" minOccurs=0> 
 <annotation> 


 <appinfo source=urn:x-gml:targetElement>Person</appinfo> 
 <appinfo source=urn:x-gml:reverseProperty>owns</appinfo> 


 </annotation> 
</element> 
 
Depending on the encoding of the class, an UML attribute of a code list or enumeration type is mapped to an 
element with either a string value (value domain: values of the enumeration or code list) or a URI pointing to 
the corresponding dictionary entry. 


EXAMPLE The code list BuildingType may be represented as: 


<element name="type" type="ex:BuildingTypeType"/> 
 
or 
 
<element name="type" type="gml:ReferencesType"> 
 <annotation> 


 <appinfo source=urn:x-gml:referencedCodelist>BuildingType</appinfo> 
 </annotation> 
</element> 
 


If an UML attribute or UML association is redefined (i.e. a subclass contains an attribute with the same name 
as in a supertype) then the type derivation takes place in two steps. First a restriction of the superclass is 
defined by a restriction of the type representing the superclass restricting the redefined attributes and/or 
specialized associations (the rules for restrictions in XML shall be adhered to by the UML Application 
Schema). Then this restricted type is extended to include all the additional properties of the subclass. An XML 
element is generated for both types. The intermediate type and its element will never be instantiated and are 
both abstract (abstract=true). The name of the intermediate type shall be the name of the instantiable type 
where the suffix Type is replaced by RestrictionType. 


E.2.4.11 Documentation 


Tagged values documentation from elements in the UML model are mapped to annotation/documentation 
elements in the XML Schema files. 


EXAMPLE  


 <element name="curveProperty" type="gml:CurvePropertyType"> 
  <annotation> 
   <documentation>This property element either references a curve via the XLink-attributes or contains the 
curve element. curveProperty is the predefined property which can be used by GML Application Schemas whenever a 
GML Feature has a property with a value that is substitutable for _Curve.</documentation> 
  </annotation> 
 </element> 
 


E.2.4.12 Imported Classes from the ISO 19100 Harmonized Model 


In addition to the rules defined above, the following rules apply when the UML Application Schema imports 
classes from the ISO 19100 Harmonized Model. 


Classes from the ISO 19100 Harmonized Model that are implemented by the GML Schemas shall be 
recognized. The use of ISO 19100 classes shall be conformant with ISO DIS 19109. The mapping of the 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


518  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


relevant classes from the ISO 19100 harmonized model according to ISO DIS 19109 is shown in the following 
table.  


Table 19  


ISO 19100 class Type of the GML property 


(attribute or association end) 


GML base type 


(specialized class) 


GML substitution element 


(specialized class) 


GM_Object gml:GeometryPropertyType gml:AbstractGeometryType gml:_Geometry 


GM_Primitive gml:GeometricPrimtivePropertyType gml:AbstractGeometricPrimtiveType gml:_GeometricPrimtive 


GM_Position gml:geometricPositionGroup (group) - - 


GM_PointArray gml:geometricPositionListGroup (group) - - 


GM_Point gml:PointPropertyType gml:PointType gml:Point 


GM_Curve gml:CurvePropertyType gml:AbstractCurveType gml:_Curve 


GM_Surface gml:SurfacePropertyType gml:AbstractSurfaceType gml:_Surface 


GM_Solid gml:SolidPropertyType gml:AbstractSolidType gml:_Solid 


GM_CompositePoint gml:PointPropertyType gml:PointType gml:Point 


GM_CompositeCurve gml:CompositeCurveType gml:CompositeCurveType gml:CompositeCurve 


GM_CompositeSurface gml:CompositeSurfaceType gml:CompositeSurfaceType gml:CompositeSurface 


GM_CompositeSolid gml:CompositeSolidType gml:CompositeSolidType gml:CompositeSolid 


GM_Complex gml:GeometricComplexPropertyType gml:GeometricComplexType gml:GeometricComplex 


GM_Aggregate gml:MultiGeometryPropertyType gml:MultiGeometryType gml:MultiGeometry 


GM_MultiPoint gml:MultiPointPropertyType gml:MultiPointType gml:MultiPoint 


GM_MultiCurve gml:MultiCurvePropertyType gml:MultiCurveType gml:MultiCurve 


GM_MultiSurface gml:MultiSurfacePropertyType gml:MultiSurfaceType gml:MultiSurface 


GM_MultiSolid gml:MultiSolidPropertyType gml:MultiSolidType gml:MultiSolid 


GM_MultiPrimitive gml:MultiGeometryPropertyType gml:MultiGeometryType gml:MultiGeometry 


TP_Node gml:DirectedNodePropertyType gml:DirectedNodeType gml:DirectedNode 


TP_Edge gml:DirectedEdgePropertyType gml:DirectedEdgeType gml:DirectedEdge 


TP_Face gml:DirectedFacePropertyType gml:DirectedFaceType gml:DirectedFace 


TP_Solid gml:DirectedTopoSolidPropertyType gml:DirectedTopoSolidType gml:DirectedTopoSolid 


TP_DirectedNode gml:DirectedNodePropertyType gml:DirectedNodeType gml:DirectedNode 


TP_DirectedEdge gml:DirectedEdgePropertyType gml:DirectedEdgeType gml:DirectedEdge 


TP_DirectedFace gml:DirectedFacePropertyType gml:DirectedFaceType gml:DirectedFace 


TP_DirectedSolid gml:DirectedTopoSolidPropertyType gml:DirectedTopoSolidType gml:DirectedTopoSolid 


TP_Complex gml:TopoComplexMemberType gml:TopoComplexType gml:TopoComplex 


TM_Instant gml:TimeInstantPropertyType gml:TimeInstantType gml:TimeInstant 


TM_Period gml:TimePeriodPropertyType gml:TimePeriodType gml:TimePeriod 


TM_TopologicalComplex gml:TimeTopologyComplexPropertyType gml:TimeTopologyComplexType gml:TimeTopologyComplex 


TM_Node gml:TimeNodePropertyType gml:TimeNodeType gml:TimeNode 


TM_Edge gml:TimeEdgePropertyType gml:TimeEdgeType gml:TimeEdge 


SI_LocationInstance gml:LocationKeyword or 
gml:LocationString 


- - 


types defined in ISO 
19115:2003 


Property types encapsulating the object 
and data types from ISO WD 19139 shall 
be used 


- - 


 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 519 
 


 


E.3 Example <informative> 


Building
+ extent : GM_Surface
+ address : Address
+ type : BuildingType


<<FeatureType>>
BuildingType


+ church
+ school
+ garage
+ residential houses
+ unknown
+ mixed


<<Enumeration>>


Address
+ street [0..1] :  CharacterString
+ housenumber [0..1] : CharacterString
+ poBox  [0..1]  :  CharacterString
+ city  : CharacterString
+ postalCode : CharacterString
+ country [0..1] : Count ryCode = DE


<<DataType>>


Parcel
+ area : Area
+ extent : GM_Surface


<<FeatureType>>


Person
+ firstName : CharacterSt ring
+ lastName : CharacterSt ring


<<FeatureType>>


0..*


1..*


+owns 0..*


+owner 1..*
CountryCode


+ DE
+ US
+ CA
+ .. .


<<CodeList>>


GM_CurveSegment
(from Geometric primitive)


<<Abstract>>


Sphere
+ center : GM_Position
+ semiminor : Vector
+ semimajor : Vector


 


Figure 84  Example Application Schema 


The application schema shown in Figure 84 may be encoded as 


<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
<schema targetNamespace="http://www.someorg.de/example" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" 
xmlns:ex="http://www.someorg.de/example" xmlns:gml="http://www.opengis.net/gml" elementFormDefault="qualified" 
version="1.0"> 
 <!-- ================================== --> 
 <import namespace="http://www.opengis.net/gml" schemaLocation="./gmlProfile.xsd"/> 
 <import namespace="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink" schemaLocation="./xlinks.xsd"/> 
 <!-- ================================== --> 
 <element name="Parcel" substitutionGroup="gml:_Feature"> 
  <complexType> 
   <complexContent> 
    <extension base="gml:AbstractFeatureType"> 
     <sequence> 
      <element name="area" type="gml:AreaType"/> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


520  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


      <element name="extent" type="gml:SurfacePropertyType"/> 
      <element name="owner" type="ex:PersonPropertyType"> 
       <annotation> 
        <appinfo source="urn:x-gml:reverseProperty">owns</appinfo> 
       </annotation> 
      </element> 
     </sequence> 
    </extension> 
   </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 </element> 
 <complexType name="ParcelPropertyType"> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="ex:Parcel" minOccurs="0"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ================================== --> 
 <element name="Building" substitutionGroup="gml:_Feature"> 
  <complexType> 
   <complexContent> 
    <extension base="gml:AbstractFeatureType"> 
     <sequence> 
      <element name="extent" type="gml:SurfacePropertyType"/> 
      <element name="address"> 
       <complexType> 
        <sequence> 
         <element name="Address" type="ex:AddressType"/> 
        </sequence> 
       </complexType> 
      </element> 
      <element name="type" type="ex:BuildingType"/> 
     </sequence> 
    </extension> 
   </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 </element> 
 <complexType name="BuildingPropertyType"> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="ex:Building" minOccurs="0"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ================================== --> 
 <element name="Person" substitutionGroup="gml:_Feature"> 
  <complexType> 
   <complexContent> 
    <extension base="gml:AbstractFeatureType"> 
     <sequence> 
      <element name="firstName" type="string"/> 
      <element name="lastName" type="string"/> 
      <element name="owns" type="ex:ParcelPropertyType"> 
       <annotation> 
        <appinfo source="urn:x-gml:reverseProperty">owner</appinfo> 
       </annotation> 
      </element> 
     </sequence> 
    </extension> 
   </complexContent> 
  </complexType> 
 </element> 
 <complexType name="PersonPropertyType"> 
  <sequence> 
   <element ref="ex:Person" minOccurs="0"/> 
  </sequence> 
  <attributeGroup ref="gml:AssociationAttributeGroup"/> 
 </complexType> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 521 
 


 


 <!-- ================================== --> 
 <complexType name="AddressType"> 
  <sequence> 
   <element name="street" type="string" minOccurs="0"/> 
   <element name="housenumber" type="string" minOccurs="0"/> 
   <element name="poBox" type="string" minOccurs="0"/> 
   <element name="city" type="string"/> 
   <element name="postalCode" type="string"/> 
   <element name="country" type="ex:CountryCode" minOccurs="0" default="DE"/> 
  </sequence> 
 </complexType> 
 <!-- ================================== --> 
 <simpleType name="BuildingTypeType"> 
  <restriction base="string"> 
   <enumeration value="church"/> 
   <enumeration value="school"/> 
   <enumeration value="garage"/> 
   <enumeration value="residential houses"/> 
   <enumeration value="unknown"/> 
   <enumeration value="mixed"/> 
  </restriction> 
 </simpleType> 
 <!-- ================================== --> 
 <simpleType name="CountryCodeType"> 
  <restriction base="string"> 
   <enumeration value="DE"/> 
   <enumeration value="US"/> 
   <enumeration value="CA"/> 
   <enumeration value="..."/> 
  </restriction> 
 </simpleType> 
 <!-- ================================== --> 
 <element name="Ellipse" type="ex:EllipseType" substitutionGroup="gml:_CurveSegment"/> 
 <complexType name="EllipseType"> 
  <complexContent> 
   <extension base="gml:AbstractCurveSegmentType"> 
    <sequence> 
      <group ref="gml:geometricPositionGroup"/> 
      <element name="semiminor" type="gml:VectorType"/> 
      <element name="semimajor" type="gml:VectorType"/> 
    </sequence> 
   </extension> 
  </complexContent> 
 </complexType> 
</schema> 
 
 


 


 


 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


522  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


Annex F 
(normative) 


 
GML-to-UML Application Schema Encoding Rules 


F.1 General concepts 


The mapping from a GML application schema to an ISO 19109 conformant UML application schema is based 
on a set of encoding rules. These encoding rules are compliant with the rules for GML application schemas as 
described in clauses 7 through 23, especially clauses 7 and 8.  


The rules listed in this clause (and the subsequent clause F.2) aim at an automatic mapping from a GML 
application schema to an ISO DIS 19109 / ISO PDTS 19103 conformant UML application schema. 


These rules do not prescribe that all GML Application Schemas shall be generated to fulfill the encoding 
requirements documented in this annex. All schemas following the rules defined in chapter 23 are valid and 
conformant GML Application Schemas.  


This annex shall be used if there is a requirement in the application domain to derive an ISO 19109 
conformant UML Application Schema from a GML Application Schema. 


The XML namespace abbreviation "xsd" is used to refer to the namespace of XML Schema, which is 
"http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema". 


The XML namespace abbreviation gml refers to the XML namespace of GML, which is 
http://www.opengis.net/gml. 


In addition, GML imports definitions from the following namespaces: 


The XML namespace abbreviation xlink refers to the XML namespace for xlinks, which is 
http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink. 


The XML namespace abbreviation smil20 refers to the XML namespace for SMIL (Synchronized Multimedia 
Integration Language), which is http://www.w3.org/2001/SMIL20/. 


The XML namespace abbreviation smil20lang refers to the XML namespace for SMIL language, which is 
http://www.w3.org/2001/SMIL20/Language.   


The term GML namespaces is used below to refer to the namespaces gml, xlink, smil20, and 
smil20lang: 


F.2 Encoding Rules 


F.2.1 General encoding requirements 


F.2.1.1 General remarks 


The schema encoding rules are based on the general idea that the corresponding type and element 
declarations in XML Schema are mapped to class definitions in the UML application schema, so that element 
structures in the XML document can be mapped to the objects in the instance model. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 523 
 


 


F.2.1.2 GML schema 


F.2.1.2.1 General  


To be a valid input into the mapping, the GML application schema shall meet the requirements of  Annex A.1 
Conformance Class B. Conformance of the XML Implementation of GML Application Schema, and shall also 
conform to all of the following rules. 


The GML application schema shall have and contain definitions for only one target namespace.   


The GML application schema may import definitions from XML namespaces other than its target namespace. 


A GML application schema consists of a set of one or more XML schema documents such that: 


 the documents have unique names; 


 the documents contain xsd:include elements for other schema documents with the same target 
namespace; 


 one top level schema document for the GML application schema target namespace is not included by any 
other schema documents for the target namespace, but directly or indirectly includes all other schema 
documents for the target namespace, if any; 


 the schema documents contain xsd:import elements for XML namespaces other than the target 
namespace, and for schema documents that contain definitions in those XML namespaces; 


 all included and imported schema documents are accessible via the URI specified by the schemaLocation 
attribute on the xsd:include and xsd:import elements that reference them;  


 a validating XML parser resolves all of the dependencies among the definitions contained in the set of 
schema documents; 


 a validating XML parser validates the set of schema documents without error; 


 a validating XML parser validates an XML instance document containing elements and attributes that 
represent all of the definitions from the target namespace of the GML application schema without error. 


 


Documentation of the definitions contained in a GML application schema shall be stored in nested 
xsd:annotation and xsd:documentation elements within the schema definition elements. 


The version of a GML application schema, if applicable, shall be contained in the version attribute of the 
xsd:schema element from the top level schema for its target namespace. 


All global type and element names within a GML application schema shall be unique. 


The GML application schema shall not define any elements with anonymous types. 


The GML application schema shall not define any XML attributes or named groups. 


Every complex type in a GML application schema shall either be a GML object type, GML feature type, a GML 
data type or a GML property type. 


Complex types with simple content shall not be defined in the GML application schema. 


The name of all types defined in a GML application schema shall end with the suffix Type. 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


524  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


A suffix RestrictionType in the name of a complex type shall only be used for an abstract type that derives by 
restriction and which is a the base type of exactly one complex type that derives from this type by extension 
and has the same name as the restricted type except that RestrictionType is replaced by Type.  


A suffix PropertyType in the name of a complex type shall only be used for an instantiable type that follows 
the pattern for by-reference-or-value property types of GML. A complex type (GML object type or GML feature 
type) with the same name shall exist that has PropertyType is replaced by Type.  


A suffix PropertyByValueType in the name of a complex type shall only be used for an instantiable type that 
follows the pattern for by- value property types of GML. A complex type (GML data type, GML object type or 
GML feature type) with the same name shall exist that has PropertyByValueType is replaced by Type.  


NOTE These rules severly restrict the possible forms of GML application schemas. It is possible that in the future 
more complex roundtrip mapping rules may be supported. 


F.2.1.2.2 GML Object Types including GML Feature Types 


Each GML object type defined in a GML application schema shall have a content model that directly or 
indirectly derives from gml:AbstractGMLType and shall have a gml:id attribute. 


Each GML object type of a particular kind defined in a GML application schema shall derive from the most 
specialized GML object type from the http://www.opengis.net/gml namespace of a similar kind (with 
matching semantics) that could possibly be used to define its content model.  So GML object types defined in 
a GML application schema to represent geographic features (GML feature types) shall derive from 
gml:AbstractFeatureType instead of from gml:AbstractGMLType, GML object types defined in a GML 
application schema to represent geometric points shall derive from gml:PointType instead of from 
gml:AbstractGeometryType, etc. 


GML object types defined in the GML application schema that derive from GML object types outside of the 
target namespace shall derive directly only from one of the following GML object types from the GML 
namespace: 


 gml:AbstractGMLType 


 gml:AbstractGeometryType 


 gml:PointType 


 gml:AbstractCurveType 


 gml:AbstractSurfaceType 


 gml:AbstractSolidType 


 gml:CurveType 


 gml:OrientableCurveType 


 gml:LineStringType 


 gml:AbstractCurveSegmentType 


 gml:SurfaceType 


 gml:OrientableSurfaceType 


 gml:PolygonType 


 gml:AbstractSurfacePatchType 


 gml:SolidType 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 525 
 


 


 gml:CompositeCurveType 


 gml:CompositeSurfaceType 


 gml:CompositeSolidType 


 gml :AbstractTopologyType 


 gml :NodeType 


 gml :EdgeType 


 gml :FaceType 


 gml :TopoSolidType 


 gml :TopoCurveType 


 gml :TopoSurfaceType 


 gml :TopoVolumeType 


 gml :TopoComplexType 


 gml:TimeInstantType 


 gml:TimePeriodType 


 gml:TimeNodeType 


 gml:TimeEdgeType 


 gml:TimeTopologyComplexType 
 


GML feature types defined in the GML application schema that derive from GML object types outside of the 
target namespace shall derive directly only from one of the following GML object types from the GML 
namespace: 


 gml:AbstractFeatureType 


 gml:AbstractFeatureCollectionType 
 


The schema definitions of abstract GML object types shall contain the attribute abstract with the value true. 


The name of abstract GML object types shall begin with the prefix Abstract. 


The schema definitions of GML object types for which no subtypes may be defined shall contain the attribute 
final with the value all. 


The properties of the GML object type shall be specified in a xsd:sequence element. 


F.2.1.2.3 Global Elements for GML Object Types 


One global XML element shall be defined for every GML object type defined in a GML application schema. 


The name of this element shall be the name of the GML object type without the Type-suffix. If the type is 
abstract, the name prefix Abstract shall be replaced by an underscore (_). 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


526  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


The element shall have a substitutionGroup attribute whose value is the name of a global XML element whose 
type is the base type of the GML object type. 


F.2.1.2.4 Default property types for GML Object Types  


A default GML property type may be defined in a GML application schema for every GML object type defined 
in that GML application schema. 


The GML property type shall either inherit directly or indirectly from gml:AssociationType or 
gml:ReferenceType, or it shall be defined according to 7.5.3 standard pattern for property declarations. 


The name of this property type shall be the name of the GML object type with the Type-suffix replaced by 
PropertyType. 


If no default property type is specified for a GML object type, an application schema shall use 
gml:ReferenceType as the default property type of the GML object type. 


F.2.1.2.5 By-value property types for GML Object Types  


A default GML property type for by-value properties may be defined in a GML application schema for every 
GML object type defined in that GML application schema. 


The GML property type shall either inherit directly or indirectly from gml:AssociationType, or it shall be defined 
according to 7.5.3 standard pattern for property declarations. The use of the gml:AsscociationAttributeGroup 
is prohibited in such properties. 


The name of this property type shall be the name of the GML object type with the Type-suffix replaced by 
PropertyByValueType. 


If no default property type for by-value properties is specified for a GML object type, an application schema 
shall use gml:AssociationType as the default property type for by-value properties of the GML object type. 


F.2.1.2.6 GML Data Types including GML Union Types 


A complex type defined in a GML application schema tha does not directly or indirectly derive from 
gml:AbstractGMLType is called a GML data type. 


The properties of the GML data type shall take one of the following forms: 


The content model of the complex type shall not include a gml:id attribute. 


 The properties of the complex type as well as the properties of all of its base types are specified in a 
xsd:sequence element with minOccurs and maxOccurs values of 1. 


 The GML data type is not derived from any base type. In this case, the properties may be specified in 
either a single xsd:sequence element with minOccurs and maxOccurs values of 1 or a single xsd:choice 
element with minOccurs and maxOccurs values of 1. 


 


F.2.1.2.7 Default property types for GML Data Types  


A default GML property type for by-value properties may be defined in a GML application schema for every 
GML data type defined in that GML application schema. 


The GML property type shall either inherit directly or indirectly from gml:AssociationType, or it shall be defined 
according to 7.5.3 standard pattern for property declarations. The use of the gml:AsscociationAttributeGroup 
is prohibited in such properties. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 527 
 


 


The name of this property type shall be the name of the GML data type with the Type-suffix replaced by 
PropertyByValueType. 


If no default property type for by-value properties is specified for a GML data type, an application schema shall 
use gml:AssociationType as the default property type for by-value properties of the GML data type. 


F.2.1.2.8 Enumerations 


A simple type defined in a GML application schema that is a restriction of xsd :string using only the 
xsd:enumeration facet is called an enumeration. 


F.2.1.2.9 Code lists 


A simple type defined in a GML application schema that is a union of an enumeration and a simple type that is 
a restriction of xsd:string using only one xsd:pattern facet with the value other: \w{2,} is called a code list. 


Enumeration values may be qualified with an appInfo annotation (source urn:x-gml:codelistValue) specifying 
that the enumeration value is the code value of another enumeration value; the associatioed enumeration 
value is given as the text value of the appInfo element. 


F.2.1.2.10 Global Elements for GML Data Types, enumerations and code lists 


No global XML element shall be defined for GML data types, enumerations or code lists defined in a GML 
application schema. 


F.2.1.2.11 Predefined basic types 


The simple types from the XML Schema and GML namespace listed in the left hand column of Table 22 may 
be used in the GML application schema. All other simple types from these namespaces shall not be used in a 
GML application schema. 


F.2.1.2.12 GML properties 


Every property of a GML object type (except properties defined in the GML namespace) or of a GML data type 
shall  with one exception  be represented by a single, locally defined xsd:element. Locally defined means 
that the name and type of the element shall be given explicitly in the element declaration (no references to 
global XML elements). The element may carry minOccurs and maxOccurs values. The name of this element 
shall be the name of the property, the type shall be either a simple type or a property type. 


The exception are elements that are substitutable for gml:featureMember. These property elements shall be 
defined as global elements and with a substitution group attribute value of gml:featureMember. These 
elements shall only be referenced from GML feature types derived by restriction directly from 
gml:AbstractFeatureCollectionType. The name of such elements shall end with the name of the global 
element of the target GML feature type. 


F.2.1.2.13 Schematron Constraints 


All Schematron constraints are ignored.  


F.2.1.2.14 Other information 


All other information in the GML application schema is not used in the encoding rules and is ignored. 


F.2.1.3 Character repertoire and languages 


The character encoding used for the schemas determines the available character repertoire. 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


528  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


F.2.1.4 Exchange metadata 


Exchange metadata can be specified for every Feature or Feature Collection in a GML instance document10. 
No specific schema for the exchange metadata is added to the GML application schema. 


F.2.1.5 Dataset and object identification 


Unique gml:id identifiers according to 7.5.6.5 and XML's ID mechanism shall be used to identify GML objects. 


F.2.1.6 Update mechanism  


No explicit update mechanism shall be defined for the feature types defined in a GML application schema. It is 
assumed that other mechanisms are used to update an instance model data store. 


F.2.1.7 Input data structure 


The schema for the input data structure is defined by the XML Schema 1.0 Part 1: Structures and Part2: 
Datatypes W3C Recommendations, and the Rules for GML Application Schemas (see clause 23). 


F.2.2 Output data structure 


See ISO DIS 19118 A.3 for a description of the output data structure. 


F.2.3 Conversion rules 


F.2.3.1 General concepts 


The schema conversion rules defined in the following clauses describe the mapping from a GML application 
schema that follows the guidelines described in F.2.1 to a UML application schema that conforms to the rules 
defined in ISO DIS 19109 and ISO PDTS 19103, using the encoding rules of of ISO DIS 19118 Annex A and 
in particular the generic instance model described in section A.3.  These rules are also based on the current 
rules for the GML model and syntax as described in clauses 7 to 23 (especially clause 7). 


The schema conversion rules map definitions from a (set of) valid GML application schema documents 
(XSDs) to a set of UML packages.  A top level package with the stereotype <<Application Schema>> is 
created to contain all the other packages in this set.  By default, one package is created in this set for each 
XSD in the GML application schema, including those directly or indirectly imported from XML namespaces 
other than the target namespace for the GML application schema, except for XSDs for the GML namespaces. 
The top level package owns directly or indirectly all UML model elements mapped from object types in the 
GML application schema.  


It is allowed to arrange the definitions of GML application schema in a different package structure as long as 
the top level package keeps its name and stereotype and all the model elements still belong directly or 
indirectly to this package. 


The type and element declarations in the GML application schema are mapped to class definitions in the UML 
application schema, so that element structures in the GML XML document can be mapped to corresponding 
objects in the instance model. 


The UML model shall contain the normative packages of the ISO 19100 Harmonized Model or a strict profile 
of this model. 


                                                      


10  By using the gml:metaDataProperty element and, for example, the ISO WD 19139 XML Schema encoding of ISO 
19115:2003. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 529 
 


 


The UML model shall contain the UML package of all other GML application schemas imported by the GML 
application schema. 


The following table gives an overview, full details of the mapping are specified in the subsequent clauses: 


Table 20   Schema encoding overview 


Table: GML  UML Application Schema Overview 


GML Application Schema UML Application Schema 


GML application schema Package <<ApplicationSchema>> 


GML schema document {name} XSD Package named {name} 


Object and property type and global element 
for any object type that is a direct or indirect 
extension of gml:AbstractFeatureType 


Class with stereotype <<FeatrueType>> 


Object and property type and global element 
for any object type that is a direct or indirect 
extension of gml:AbstractGMLType, other 
than those that extend 
gml:AbstractFeatureType 


Class with stereotype <<ObjectType>> 


Data and property type and global element 
for any object type that is not a direct or 
indirect extension of AbstractGMLType and 
whose content model is a sequence of 
properties 


Class with stereotype <<DataType>> 


Restriction of xsd:string with enumeration 
values Class with stereotype <<Enumeration>> 


Union of an enumeration and a pattern Class with stereotype <<CodeList>>  


Data and property type and global element 
for any object type that is not a direct or 
indirect extension of AbstractGMLType and 
whose content model is a choice of 
properties 


Class with stereotype <<Union>>  


Local xsd:element of a simpleType or a 
complexType with simpleContent or a type 
that does not directly or indirectly inherit from 
gml:AbstractGMLType 


UML Attribute 


Local xsd:element of a type that contains 
gml:AssociationAttributeGroup  UML Association Role 


Schematron constraints Not encoded 


 


The multiplicity of attributes and association roles is derived from the minOccurs and maxOccurs attributes in 
local xsd:element declarations. 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


530  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


F.2.3.2 GML Schema Documents 


A top level package with the stereotype <<Application Schema>> is created to contain all the other packages 
generated for the GML application schema. 


 The xmlNamespace and xmlNamespaceAbbreviation tagged values are applied to the 
<<ApplicationSchema>> package with corresponding values for the target namespace of the GML 
application schema 


EXAMPLE http://www.myorg.com/myns and myns 


 The version tagged value is applied to the <<ApplicationSchema>> package with the default value of 
1.0.  If the version attribute of the xsd:schema element of the top level schema document for the GML 
application schema exists and contains a non-empty value, its value replaces the default tagged value.  


By default, one UML package is generated for each input schema document in the GML application schema, 
including those directly or indirectly imported from XML namespaces other than the target namespace of the 
GML application schema  except for XML Schema documents from the GML namespaces. Alternatively, a 
single XML Schema document may also be split into several UML packages. 


The packages are generated in the <<ApplicationSchema>> package for the GML application schema with 
names that correspond to the names of the input schema documents. 


The xsd:include and xsd:import statements in each input schema document are used to determine and set the 
dependencies of the packages generated in the <<Application Schema>> package. 


F.2.3.3 GML Object Types  


Every GML object type shall be mapped to a UML class. 


If the object type directly or indirectly derives from gml:AbstractFeatureType, the stereotype of the class shall 
be <<FeatureType>>, otherwise the stereotype shall be <<ObjectType>>. 


The name of the class shall be the same as the name of the global element of the GML object type. 


The class shall be abstract, if and only if the GML object type is abstract. 


If the GML object type is derived from another GML object type, then the class inherits from the corresponding 
superclass. If the base type is defined in the GML application schema or another imported GML application 
schema, then the superclass is the class corresponding to this GML object type. If the base type is defined in 
the GML namespace, then the superclass is determined by Table 21. 


Table 21  


GML object type ISO 19100 class 


gml:AbstractGeometryType GM_Object 


gml:AbstractGeometricPrimtiveType GM_Primitive 


gml:PointType GM_Point 


gml:AbstractCurveType GM_Curve 


gml:AbstractSurfaceType GM_Surface 


gml:AbstractSolidType GM_Solid 


gml:PointType GM_CompositePoint 


gml:CompositeCurveType GM_CompositeCurve 


gml:CompositeSurfaceType GM_CompositeSurface 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 531 
 


 


gml:CompositeSolidType GM_CompositeSolid 


gml:GeometricComplexType GM_Complex 


gml:MultiGeometryType GM_Aggregate 


gml:MultiPointType GM_MultiPoint 


gml:MultiCurveType GM_MultiCurve 


gml:MultiSurfaceType GM_MultiSurface 


gml:MultiSolidType GM_MultiSolid 


gml:MultiGeometryType GM_MultiPrimitive 


gml:DirectedNodeType TP_Node 


gml:DirectedEdgeType TP_Edge 


gml:DirectedFaceType TP_Face 


gml:DirectedTopoSolidType TP_Solid 


gml:DirectedNodeType TP_DirectedNode 


gml:DirectedEdgeType TP_DirectedEdge 


gml:DirectedFaceType TP_DirectedFace 


gml:DirectedTopoSolidType TP_DirectedSolid 


gml:TopoComplexType TP_Complex 


gml:TimeInstantType TM_Instant 


gml:TimePeriodType TM_Period 


gml:TimeTopologyComplexType TM_TopologicalComplex 


gml:TimeNodeType TM_Node 


gml:TimeEdgeType TM_Edge 
 


The GML properties of the GML object type shall be mapped to attributes and association roles as described 
in clause F.2.3.9.  


F.2.3.4 GML Object Types (imported from the GML schemas) 


The complex types from the GML namespace listed in the left hand column of Table 21 shall be mapped to 
the predefined UML classes from the ISO 19100 profile of GML in the right hand column of the table. 


F.2.3.5 Basic Types 


The simple types from the XML Schema and GML namespace shown in the left hand column of Table 22 shall 
be mapped to the predefined UML classes from the ISO 19100 profile of GML in the right hand column of the 
table. 


Table 22  


XML type UML class 


xsd:string CharacterString 


xsd:boolean Boolean 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


532  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


xsd:float Real 


xsd:double Real (Default), Decimal or Number 


xsd:decimal Decimal 


xsd:date Date 


xsd:time Time 


xsd:dateTime DateTime 


xsd:integer Integer 


gml:VectorType Vector 


gml:CodeType GenericName (default), LocalName 
oder ScopeName 


gml:LengthType Length 


gml:AngleType Angle 


gml:SpeedType Velocity 


gml:ScaleType Scale 


gml:AreaType Area 


gml:VolumeType Volume 


gml:MeasureType Measure 


xsd:nonPositiveInteger Integer 


xsd:negativeInteger Integer 


xsd:nonNegativeInteger Integer 


xsd:positiveInteger Integer 


 


F.2.3.6 GML Data Types  


Every GML data type shall be mapped to a UML class. The name of the class shall be the same as the name 
of the complex type without the Type-suffix. 


If the GML data type is derived from another GML data type (base type), then the class inherits from the 
corresponding superclass. 


If the properties of the GML data type are embedded in a xsd:sequence element, the stereotype of the class 
shall be <<DataType>>, if they are embedded in a xsd:choice element, the stereotype of the class shall be set 
to <<Union>>. 


The GML properties of the GML object type shall be mapped to attributes and association roles as described 
in clause F.2.3.9.  


F.2.3.7 Enumerations 


A simple type defined an the GML application schema as a restriction of xsd:string with enumeration values 
shall be mapped to a class with the <<Enumeration>> stereotype in the UML application schema. 


The name of the class shall be the name of the simple type. 


Every xsd:enumeration facet without an xsd:appInfo annotation with a source attribute urn:x-
gml:codelistValue shall be mapped to an UML attribute with the value as the attribute name. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 533 
 


 


Every xsd:enumeration facet with an xsd:appInfo annotation with a source attribute urn:x-gml:codelistValue 
shall be mapped to an initial value of the UML attribute with the same name as the value of the appinfo 
element. If no such UML attribute exists in the class, the facet shall be ignored. 


F.2.3.8 Code lists 


A simple type defined an the GML application schema as a union of a xsd:pattern restriction with the value 
other:\w{2,} and an enumeration shall be mapped to a class with the stereotype <<CodeList>> in the UML 
application schema. 


The name of the class shall be the name of the simple type. 


Every xsd:enumeration facet of the enumeration without an xsd:appInfo annotation with a source attribute 
urn:x-gml:codelistValue shall be mapped to an UML attribute with the value as the attribute name. 


Every xsd:enumeration facet of the enumeration with an xsd:appInfo annotation with a source attribute urn:x-
gml:codelistValue shall be mapped to an initial value of the UML attribute with the same name as the value of 
the appinfo element. If no such UML attribute exists in the class, the facet shall be ignored. 


F.2.3.9 GML properties 


If the type of a property element  


 is a simple type or the property type of GML data type, the property shall be mapped to an UML attribute 
with the corresponding type as the data type 


 is a by-value property type of a GML object type, the property shall be mapped to an UML association role 
of a UML composition to the class representing the target GML object type 


 is a by-reference-or-value property type of a GML object type, the property shall be mapped to an UML 
association role of a UML association to the class representing the target GML object type 


 is a by-reference property type of a GML object type, the property shall be mapped to an UML association 
role of a UML association to the class representing the target GML object type where the target GML 
object type shall be determined from the embedded xsd:appInfo annotation with a source attribute value 
urn:x-gml:targetElement specifying the qualified element name of the target type). 


 


The name of the UML attribute or association role shall be the name of the GML property element. 


The multiplicity of the UML attribute or association role shall be derived from the minOccurs and maxOccurs 
value of the GML property. 


If the property element has an xsd:appInfo annotation with a source attribute value urn:x-
gml:reverseProperty embedded, then the association role shall be defined as part of the association between 
the two classes where the other association role has a name equal to the value of the xsd:appInfo element. 


F.2.3.10 Documentation 


XML Schema xsd:annotation/xsd:documentation elements in GML application schemas are mapped to 
documentation tagged values in the UML application schema. 


 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


534  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


Annex G 
(Informative) 


 
Guidelines for Subsetting GML Schemas 


G.1 General 


An automated approach is recommended for subsetting GML schemas.  This annex contains an informative 
XSLT reference implementation of a GML schema subset tool.  The tool consists of three XSLT stylesheets, 
the three stylesheets are show in clauses G.2, G.3 and G.4 below. 


To create a GML subset schema using this tool: 


1. Transform gml.xsd using depends.xslt and an XSLT processor to produce gml.dep, e.g. using Xalan 
by 


$ java org.apache.xalan.xslt.Process -IN ../base/gml.xsd -XSL depends.xslt -OUT gml.dep 


2. If the XSLT processor you are using cannot pass parameters to a stylesheet being processed, edit 
gmlSubset.xslt, and change the wanted parameter to contain a comma separated list (with a trailing 
comma) of the namespace-qualified global types and elements you want in your GML subset schema.  
For example, change 


<xsl:param name="wanted">,</xsl:param> 


to 


       <xsl:param name="wanted">gml:featureProperty,gml:lineStringProperty,gml:polygonProperty,</xsl:param> 


3. Transform gml.dep using gmlSubset.xslt, a parameter named wanted set to a comma separated list 
(with a trailing comma) of the namespace qualified global types and elements you want in your GML 
subset schema, and an XSLT processor to produce gmlSubset.xsd, which will contain the global 
types and elements specified in the wanted parameter and all of the global types and elements on 
which they directly or indirectly use. 


4. If your wanted list did not include or depend on any elements or types from the namespaces named 
smil20 or smil20lang, you may wish to edit the generated schema to remove the following 
namespace definitions from the schema element: 


xmlns:smil20="http://www.w3.org/2001/SMIL20/" 


xmlns:smil20lang="http://www.w3.org/2001/SMIL20/Language" 


xmlns:x="http://www.w3.org/XML/1998/namespace" 


5. The generated gmlSubset.xsd will include imports for the namespaces named xlink, smil20 and 
smil20lang if your wanted list included or depended on any elements or types from the 
corresponding namespaces.  Otherwise, it is a stand-alone GML subset schema that conforms to the 
requirements for GML profiles. 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 535 
 


 


G.2 depends.xslt 


<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
<xsl:stylesheet version="1.0"  
 xmlns:xsl="http://www.w3.org/1999/XSL/Transform"  
 xmlns:xsd="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema"  
 xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink"> 
 <!-- ===========================================================  
 This stylesheet is designed to be used on gml.xsd to produce gml.dep  
 for use by the gml schema subset utility gmlSubset.xslt to produce a specialized 
 gmlSubset.xsd that contains only the specified types and elements, and the types  
 and elements on which they depend.  
 ===========================================================--> 
 <xsl:output method="xml" encoding="UTF-8" indent="yes"/> 
 <xsl:include href="utility.xslt"/> 
 <!-- NEWLINE = &#xA; --> 
 <xsl:param 
name="schemas">gml.xsd,observation.xsd,dynamicFeature.xsd,coverage.xsd,topology.xsd,defaultStyle.xsd,coordinateReferenc
eSystems.xsd,feature.xsd,valueObjects.xsd,grids.xsd,geometryComplexes.xsd,datums.xsd,coordinateSystems.xsd,coordinateOp
erations.xsd,geometryAggregates.xsd,referenceSystems.xsd,dataQuality.xsd,geometryPrimitives.xsd,geometryBasic2d.xsd,direct
ion.xsd,geometryBasic0d1d.xsd,measures.xsd,temporal.xsd,units.xsd,dictionary.xsd,gmlBase.xsd,basicTypes.xsd,</xsl:param> 
 <xsl:param name="allSchemas"> 
  <xsl:call-template name="getUniqueSchemaList"> 
   <xsl:with-param name="list" select="$schemas"/> 
   <xsl:with-param name="usePre"></xsl:with-param> 
  </xsl:call-template> 
 </xsl:param> 
 <xsl:template match="/"> 
  <xsl:param name="docName">gml.xsd</xsl:param> 
  <xsl:param name="top" select="true()"/> 
  <xsl:param name="tns" select="//xsd:schema/@targetNamespace"/> 
  <xsl:param name="vers" select="//xsd:schema/@version"/> 
  <xsl:variable name="ltns"> 
   <xsl:for-each select="//xsd:schema/namespace::*"> 
    <xsl:if test="local-name() != 'targetNamespace' and string() = $tns"> 
     <xsl:value-of select="local-name()"/> 
    </xsl:if> 
   </xsl:for-each> 
  </xsl:variable> 
  <xsl:variable name="tnsp"> 
   <xsl:choose> 
    <xsl:when test="$ltns = ''"> 
     <xsl:call-template name="getTargetNameSpacePrefix"> 
      <xsl:with-param name="list" select="$tns"/> 
     </xsl:call-template> 
    </xsl:when> 
    <xsl:otherwise> 
     <xsl:value-of select="$ltns"/> 
    </xsl:otherwise> 
   </xsl:choose> 
  </xsl:variable> 
  <xsl:text>&#xA;</xsl:text> 
  <xsl:choose> 
   <xsl:when test="$top"> 
    <xsl:text disable-output-escaping="yes">&lt;depends version="</xsl:text><xsl:value-of select="$vers"/><xsl:text 
disable-output-escaping="yes">"&gt;</xsl:text> 
   </xsl:when> 
   <xsl:otherwise> 
    <xsl:for-each select="/xsd:schema"> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


536  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


     <xsl:for-each select="xsd:complexType | xsd:group | xsd:simpleType | xsd:element | xsd:attribute | 
xsd:attributeGroup"> 
      <xsl:variable name="type" select="local-name()"/> 
      <xsl:choose> 
       <xsl:when test="$type = 'complexType' "> 
        <xsl:call-template name="complexType"> 
         <xsl:with-param name="docName" select="$docName"/> 
         <xsl:with-param name="targetNamespace" select="$tnsp"/> 
        </xsl:call-template> 
       </xsl:when> 
       <xsl:when test="$type = 'group' "> 
        <xsl:call-template name="complexType"> 
         <xsl:with-param name="docName" select="$docName"/> 
         <xsl:with-param name="targetNamespace" select="$tnsp"/> 
        </xsl:call-template> 
       </xsl:when> 
       <xsl:when test="$type = 'simpleType' "> 
        <xsl:call-template name="simpleType"> 
         <xsl:with-param name="docName" select="$docName"/> 
         <xsl:with-param name="targetNamespace" select="$tnsp"/> 
        </xsl:call-template> 
       </xsl:when> 
       <xsl:when test="$type = 'element' "> 
        <xsl:call-template name="globalElement"> 
         <xsl:with-param name="docName" select="$docName"/> 
         <xsl:with-param name="targetNamespace" select="$tnsp"/> 
        </xsl:call-template> 
       </xsl:when> 
       <xsl:when test="$type = 'attribute' "> 
        <xsl:call-template name="globalAtt"> 
         <xsl:with-param name="docName" select="$docName"/> 
         <xsl:with-param name="targetNamespace" select="$tnsp"/> 
        </xsl:call-template> 
       </xsl:when> 
       <xsl:when test="$type = 'attributeGroup' "> 
        <xsl:call-template name="globalAtt"> 
         <xsl:with-param name="docName" select="$docName"/> 
         <xsl:with-param name="targetNamespace" select="$tnsp"/> 
        </xsl:call-template> 
       </xsl:when> 
       <xsl:otherwise/> 
      </xsl:choose> 
     </xsl:for-each> 
    </xsl:for-each> 
   </xsl:otherwise> 
  </xsl:choose> 
  <xsl:if test="$top"> 
   <xsl:call-template name="dependSchemas"> 
    <xsl:with-param name="list" select="$allSchemas"/> 
   </xsl:call-template> 
   <xsl:text disable-output-escaping="yes">&#xA;&lt;/depends&gt;&#xA;</xsl:text> 
  </xsl:if> 
 </xsl:template> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <xsl:template name="complexType"> 
  <xsl:param name="docName"/> 
  <xsl:param name="targetNamespace"/> 
  <xsl:variable name="name" select="@name"/> 
  <xsl:if test="$name"> 
   <xsl:element name="def"> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 537 
 


 


    <xsl:attribute name="name"><xsl:value-of select="$targetNamespace"/>:<xsl:value-of 
select="$name"/></xsl:attribute> 
    <xsl:attribute name="doc"><xsl:value-of select="$docName"/></xsl:attribute> 
    <xsl:variable name="uses"> 
     <xsl:apply-templates select="./xsd:complexContent|./xsd:simpleContent"/> 
     <xsl:call-template name="EltAndAtt"/> 
    </xsl:variable> 
    <!-- USES <xsl:value-of select="$uses"/> --> 
    <xsl:call-template name="writeUses"> 
     <xsl:with-param name="list" select="$uses"/> 
    </xsl:call-template> 
   </xsl:element> 
  </xsl:if> 
 </xsl:template> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <xsl:template match="xsd:complexContent"> 
  <xsl:for-each select="descendant::xsd:extension"> 
   <xsl:value-of select="@base"/> 
   <xsl:text>?extension|</xsl:text> 
  </xsl:for-each> 
  <xsl:for-each select="descendant::xsd:restriction"> 
   <xsl:value-of select="@base"/> 
   <xsl:text>?restriction|</xsl:text> 
  </xsl:for-each>   
 </xsl:template> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <xsl:template match="xsd:simpleContent"> 
  <xsl:for-each select="descendant::xsd:extension"> 
   <xsl:value-of select="@base"/> 
   <xsl:text>?extension|</xsl:text> 
  </xsl:for-each> 
  <xsl:for-each select="descendant::xsd:restriction"> 
   <xsl:value-of select="@base"/> 
   <xsl:text>?restriction|</xsl:text> 
  </xsl:for-each> 
 </xsl:template> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <xsl:template name="EltAndAtt"> 
  <xsl:for-each select="descendant::xsd:element | descendant::xsd:group | descendant::xsd:attribute | 
descendant::xsd:attributeGroup"> 
   <xsl:variable name="name" select="@type | @ref"/> 
   <xsl:if test="$name and contains($name,':')"> 
    <xsl:value-of select="$name"/> 
    <xsl:text>|</xsl:text> 
   </xsl:if> 
  </xsl:for-each> 
 </xsl:template> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <xsl:template name="simpleType"> 
  <xsl:param name="docName"/> 
  <xsl:param name="targetNamespace"/> 
  <xsl:variable name="name" select="@name"/> 
  <xsl:if test="$name"> 
   <xsl:element name="def"> 
    <xsl:attribute name="name"><xsl:value-of select="$targetNamespace"/>:<xsl:value-of 
select="$name"/></xsl:attribute> 
    <xsl:attribute name="doc"><xsl:value-of select="$docName"/></xsl:attribute> 
    <!-- SIMPLE <xsl:copy-of select="."/>--> 
    <xsl:variable name="uses"> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


538  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


     <xsl:for-each select="xsd:union"> 
     <!-- UNION <xsl:value-of select="@memberTypes"/> --> 
      <xsl:variable name="members" select="@memberTypes"/> 
      <xsl:if test="$members"> 
       <xsl:value-of select="translate($members,' ','|')"/> 
       <xsl:text>|</xsl:text> 
      </xsl:if> 
     </xsl:for-each> 
     <xsl:for-each select="xsd:list"> 
      <xsl:variable name="items" select="@itemType"/> 
      <xsl:if test="$items"> 
       <xsl:value-of select="$items"/> 
       <xsl:text>|</xsl:text> 
      </xsl:if> 
     </xsl:for-each> 
    </xsl:variable> 
     <!-- USES <xsl:value-of select="$uses"/> --> 
    <xsl:call-template name="writeUses"> 
     <xsl:with-param name="list" select="$uses"/> 
    </xsl:call-template> 
   </xsl:element> 
  </xsl:if> 
 </xsl:template> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <xsl:template name="globalElement"> 
  <xsl:param name="docName"/> 
  <xsl:param name="targetNamespace"/> 
  <xsl:variable name="name" select="@name"/> 
  <xsl:if test="$name"> 
   <xsl:element name="def"> 
    <xsl:attribute name="name"><xsl:value-of select="$targetNamespace"/>:<xsl:value-of 
select="$name"/></xsl:attribute> 
    <xsl:attribute name="doc"><xsl:value-of select="$docName"/></xsl:attribute> 
    <xsl:variable name="uses"> 
     <xsl:variable name="type" select="@type"/> 
     <xsl:if test="$type and contains($type,':')"> 
      <xsl:value-of select="$type"/> 
      <xsl:text>|</xsl:text> 
     </xsl:if> 
     <xsl:variable name="sub" select="@substitutionGroup"/> 
     <xsl:if test="$sub"> 
      <xsl:value-of select="$sub"/> 
      <xsl:text>|</xsl:text> 
     </xsl:if> 
    </xsl:variable> 
    <!-- USES <xsl:value-of select="$uses"/> --> 
    <xsl:call-template name="writeUses"> 
     <xsl:with-param name="list" select="$uses"/> 
    </xsl:call-template> 
   </xsl:element> 
  </xsl:if> 
 </xsl:template> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <xsl:template name="globalAtt"> 
  <xsl:param name="docName"/> 
  <xsl:param name="targetNamespace"/> 
  <xsl:variable name="name" select="@name"/> 
  <xsl:if test="$name"> 
   <xsl:element name="def"> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 539 
 


 


    <xsl:attribute name="name"><xsl:value-of select="$targetNamespace"/>:<xsl:value-of 
select="$name"/></xsl:attribute> 
    <xsl:attribute name="doc"><xsl:value-of select="$docName"/></xsl:attribute> 
    <xsl:variable name="uses"> 
     <xsl:variable name="type" select="@type"/> 
     <xsl:if test="$type and contains($type,':')"> 
      <xsl:value-of select="$type"/> 
      <xsl:text>|</xsl:text> 
     </xsl:if> 
     <xsl:call-template name="EltAndAtt"/> 
    </xsl:variable> 
    <!-- USES <xsl:value-of select="$uses"/> --> 
    <xsl:call-template name="writeUses"> 
     <xsl:with-param name="list" select="$uses"/> 
    </xsl:call-template> 
   </xsl:element> 
  </xsl:if> 
 </xsl:template> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <xsl:template name="writeUses"> 
  <xsl:param name="list"/> 
  <xsl:if test="$list != ''"> 
   <xsl:variable name="first" select="substring-before($list, '|')"/> 
   <xsl:variable name="eor" select="substring-after($first, '?')"/> 
   <xsl:variable name="use"> 
    <xsl:choose> 
     <xsl:when test="contains($first, '?')"> 
      <xsl:value-of select="substring-before($first, '?')"/> 
     </xsl:when> 
     <xsl:otherwise> 
      <xsl:value-of select="$first"/> 
     </xsl:otherwise> 
    </xsl:choose> 
   </xsl:variable> 
   <xsl:variable name="testp"> 
    <xsl:value-of select="$use"/> 
    <xsl:text>|</xsl:text> 
   </xsl:variable> 
   <xsl:variable name="testq"> 
    <xsl:value-of select="$use"/> 
    <xsl:text>?</xsl:text> 
   </xsl:variable> 
   <xsl:variable name="rest" select="substring-after($list, '|')"/> 
   <xsl:choose> 
    <xsl:when test="contains($rest, $testp)"/> 
    <xsl:when test="contains($rest, $testq)"/> 
    <xsl:when test="$use = ''"/> 
    <xsl:otherwise> 
     <xsl:element name="uses"> 
      <xsl:attribute name="name"><xsl:value-of select="$use"/></xsl:attribute> 
      <xsl:if test="$eor != ''"> 
       <xsl:attribute name="derivation"><xsl:value-of select="$eor"/> </xsl:attribute> 
      </xsl:if> 
     </xsl:element> 
    </xsl:otherwise> 
   </xsl:choose> 
   <xsl:call-template name="writeUses"> 
    <xsl:with-param name="list" select="$rest"/> 
   </xsl:call-template> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


540  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


  </xsl:if> 
 </xsl:template> 
 <!-- ==================================================== --> 
 <xsl:template name="dependSchemas"> 
  <xsl:param name="list"/> 
  <xsl:if test="$list != ''"> 
   <xsl:variable name="first" select="substring-before($list, ',')"/> 
   <xsl:variable name="rest" select="substring-after($list, ',')"/> 
   <xsl:apply-templates select="document($first, /)">  
    <xsl:with-param name="docName" select="$first"/> 
    <xsl:with-param name="top" select="false()"/> 
   </xsl:apply-templates> 
   <xsl:choose> 
    <xsl:when test="contains($rest,',')"> 
     <xsl:call-template name="dependSchemas"> 
      <xsl:with-param name="list" select="$rest"/> 
     </xsl:call-template> 
    </xsl:when> 
    <xsl:otherwise/> 
   </xsl:choose> 
  </xsl:if> 
 </xsl:template> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
</xsl:stylesheet> 


G.3 gmlSubset.xslt 


<xsl:stylesheet version="1.0"  
 xmlns:xsl="http://www.w3.org/1999/XSL/Transform"  
 xmlns:xsd="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema"  
 xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink"> 
 <xsl:output method="xml" encoding="UTF-8" indent="yes"/> 
 <!-- ===========================================================  
 This stylesheet is designed to be used on gml.dep (produced from  
 gml.xsd by depends.xslt) to produce a specialized gmlSubset.xsd that  
 contains only the types and elements specified in the "wanted" parameter, 
 and the types and elements on which they depend.  Note that the type and 
 element items in the "wanted" parameter must include namespace prefixes,  
 and that they must be separated by commas, including a trailing comma after  
 the last item.   
 ===========================================================--> 
 <xsl:include href="utility.xslt"/> 
 <xsl:param name="baseUri" select="document('../../base/gml.xsd')"/> 
 <!-- sample1 <xsl:param name="wanted">gml:featureProperty,gml:lineStringProperty,gml:polygonProperty,</xsl:param> --> 
 <!-- sample2 <xsl:param name="wanted">gml:GeographicCRS,gml:_Coverage,gml:track,</xsl:param> --> 
 <!-- sample3 <xsl:param 
name="wanted">gml:_FeatureCollection,gml:ItemStyleDescriptorType,gml:FeatureConstraintType,</xsl:param> --> 
 <xsl:param 
name="wanted">gml:metaDataProperty,gml:_association,gml:members,gml:Array,gml:curveProperty,gml:LineString,gml:LinearRi
ng,gml:exterior,gml:interior,gml:surfaceMember,gml:surfaceProperty,gml:multiSurfaceProperty,gml:directedNode,gml:directedEdg
e,gml:directedFace,gml:IsolatedProperty,gml:featureProperty,gml:featureMembers,gml:_FeatureCollection,gml:featureMember,g
ml:BaseStyleDescriptorType,</xsl:param> 
 <xsl:template match="/"> 
  <xsl:variable name="wantedList"> 
   <xsl:call-template name="getWantedList"> 
    <xsl:with-param name="list" select="$wanted"/> 
    <xsl:with-param name="from">BEGIN</xsl:with-param> 
    <xsl:with-param name="depth">0</xsl:with-param> 
   </xsl:call-template> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 541 
 


 


  </xsl:variable> 
  <xsl:variable name="vers"  select="//depends/@version"/>  
  <schema targetNamespace="http://www.opengis.net/gml" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" 
xmlns:sch="http://www.ascc.net/xml/schematron" xmlns:gml="http://www.opengis.net/gml" 
xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink" xmlns:smil20="http://www.w3.org/2001/SMIL20/" 
xmlns:smil20lang="http://www.w3.org/2001/SMIL20/Language"  xmlns:x="http://www.w3.org/XML/1998/namespace" 
elementFormDefault="qualified" version="{$vers}"> 
   <annotation> 
    <documentation>GML Subset schema for <xsl:value-of select="$wanted"/>  written by gmlSubset.xslt. 
</documentation> 
   </annotation> 
    
   <xsl:if test="contains($wantedList,'xlink:')"> 
    <import namespace="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink" schemaLocation="../../xlink/xlinks.xsd"/> 
   </xsl:if> 
   <xsl:if test="contains($wantedList,'smil20:')"> 
    <import namespace="http://www.w3.org/2001/SMIL20/" schemaLocation="../../smil/smil20.xsd"/> 
   </xsl:if> 
   <xsl:if test="contains($wantedList,'smil20lang:')"> 
    <import namespace="http://www.w3.org/2001/SMIL20/Language" schemaLocation="../../smil/smil20-
language.xsd"/> 
   </xsl:if> 
   <xsl:call-template name="writeWantedList"> 
    <xsl:with-param name="list" select="$wantedList"/> 
   </xsl:call-template> 
  </schema> 
 </xsl:template> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <xsl:template name="getDocName"> 
  <xsl:param name="wanted"/> 
  <xsl:for-each select="//depends/def[@name=$wanted]"> 
   <xsl:value-of select="@doc"/> 
  </xsl:for-each> 
 </xsl:template> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <xsl:template name="getUses"> 
  <xsl:param name="wanted"/> 
  <xsl:for-each select="//depends/def[@name=$wanted]"> 
   <xsl:for-each select="uses"> 
    <xsl:value-of select="@name"/> 
    <xsl:text>,</xsl:text> 
   </xsl:for-each> 
  </xsl:for-each> 
 </xsl:template> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <xsl:template name="writeWanted"> 
  <xsl:param name="wanted"/> 
  <xsl:choose> 
   <xsl:when test="contains($wanted,'xlink:') or contains($wanted,'wfs:') or contains($wanted,'smil20')"> 
    <!-- XLINK <xsl:value-of select="$wanted"/> --> 
   </xsl:when> 
   <xsl:otherwise> 
    <!-- OTHER <xsl:value-of select="$wanted"/> --> 
    <xsl:variable name="docName"> 
     <xsl:call-template name="getDocName"> 
      <xsl:with-param name="wanted" select="$wanted"/> 
     </xsl:call-template> 
    </xsl:variable> 
    <xsl:variable name="localName"> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


542  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


     <xsl:call-template name="removePrefix"> 
      <xsl:with-param name="name" select="$wanted"/> 
      <xsl:with-param name="pre">:</xsl:with-param> 
     </xsl:call-template> 
    </xsl:variable> 
    <xsl:call-template name="Separator"/> 
    <xsl:for-each select="document($docName,$baseUri)"> 
     <xsl:for-each select="//xsd:schema/*[@name = $localName]"> 
      <xsl:copy-of select="."/> 
     </xsl:for-each> 
    </xsl:for-each> 
   </xsl:otherwise> 
  </xsl:choose> 
 </xsl:template> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <xsl:template name="writeWantedList"> 
  <xsl:param name="list"/> 
  <xsl:if test="$list != ''"> 
   <xsl:variable name="first" select="substring-before($list, ',')"/> 
   <xsl:variable name="rest" select="substring-after($list, ',')"/> 
   <xsl:call-template name="writeWanted"> 
    <xsl:with-param name="wanted" select="$first"/> 
   </xsl:call-template> 
   <xsl:if test="contains($rest,',')"> 
    <xsl:call-template name="writeWantedList"> 
     <xsl:with-param name="list" select="$rest"/> 
    </xsl:call-template> 
   </xsl:if> 
  </xsl:if> 
 </xsl:template> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
 <xsl:template name="getWantedList"> 
  <xsl:param name="list"/> 
  <xsl:param name="seen"/> 
  <xsl:param name="from"/> 
  <xsl:param name="depth"/> 
  <xsl:if test="$list != ''"> 
   <xsl:variable name="first" select="substring-before($list, ',')"/> 
   <xsl:variable name="firstSep" select="concat($first,',')"/> 
   <xsl:variable name="rest" select="substring-after($list, ',')"/> 
   <xsl:choose> 
    <xsl:when test="contains($seen,$firstSep)"> 
     <xsl:call-template name="getWantedList"> 
      <xsl:with-param name="list" select="$rest"/> 
      <xsl:with-param name="seen" select="$seen"/> 
      <xsl:with-param name="from">REST</xsl:with-param> 
      <xsl:with-param name="depth" select="$depth + 1"/> 
     </xsl:call-template> 
    </xsl:when> 
    <xsl:otherwise> 
     <xsl:value-of select="$firstSep"/> 
     <xsl:variable name="usesList"> 
      <xsl:call-template name="getUses"> 
       <xsl:with-param name="wanted" select="$first"/> 
      </xsl:call-template> 
     </xsl:variable> 
     <xsl:variable name="toDo" select="concat($usesList,$rest)"/> 
     <xsl:variable name="nowSeen" select="concat($seen,$firstSep)"/> 
     <xsl:call-template name="getWantedList"> 
      <xsl:with-param name="list" select="$toDo"/> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 543 
 


 


      <xsl:with-param name="seen" select="$nowSeen"/> 
      <xsl:with-param name="from">USES</xsl:with-param> 
      <xsl:with-param name="depth" select="$depth + 1"/> 
     </xsl:call-template> 
    </xsl:otherwise> 
   </xsl:choose> 
  </xsl:if> 
 </xsl:template> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
</xsl:stylesheet> 


G.4 utility.xslt 
 
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
<xsl:stylesheet version="1.0" xmlns:xsl="http://www.w3.org/1999/XSL/Transform" 
xmlns:xsd="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema"> 
 <xsl:output method="xml" encoding="UTF-8" indent="yes"/> 
 <!-- ==================================================== --> 
 <xsl:template name="getTargetNameSpacePrefix"> 
  <xsl:param name="list"/> 
  <xsl:if test="$list != ''"> 
   <xsl:variable name="first" select="substring-before($list, '/')"/> 
   <xsl:variable name="rest" select="substring-after($list, '/')"/> 
   <xsl:choose> 
    <xsl:when test="contains($rest,'/')"> 
     <xsl:call-template name="getTargetNameSpacePrefix"> 
      <xsl:with-param name="list" select="$rest"/> 
     </xsl:call-template> 
    </xsl:when> 
    <xsl:when test="$rest =''"> 
     <xsl:value-of select="$first"/> 
    </xsl:when> 
    <xsl:otherwise> 
     <xsl:value-of select="$rest"/> 
    </xsl:otherwise> 
   </xsl:choose> 
  </xsl:if> 
 </xsl:template> 
 <!-- ==================================================== --> 
 <xsl:template name="getPathPrefix"> 
  <xsl:param name="file"/> 
  <xsl:if test="contains($file,'/')"> 
   <xsl:variable name="pre" select="substring-before($file,'/')"/> 
   <xsl:variable name="suf" select="substring-after($file,'/')"/> 
   <xsl:choose> 
    <xsl:when test="contains($suf,'/')"> 
     <xsl:value-of select="$pre"/><xsl:text>/</xsl:text> 
     <xsl:call-template name="getPathPrefix"> 
      <xsl:with-param name="file" select="$suf"/> 
     </xsl:call-template> 
    </xsl:when> 
    <xsl:otherwise> 
     <xsl:variable name="path"> 
      <xsl:call-template name="removeSuffix"> 
       <xsl:with-param name="name" select="$file"/> 
       <xsl:with-param name="suf" select="$suf"/> 
      </xsl:call-template> 
     </xsl:variable> 
     <xsl:value-of select="$path"/> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


544  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


    </xsl:otherwise> 
   </xsl:choose> 
  </xsl:if> 
 </xsl:template> 
 <!-- ==================================================== --> 
 <xsl:template name="removePrefix"> 
  <xsl:param name="name"/> 
  <xsl:param name="pre"/> 
  <xsl:variable name="npName"> 
   <xsl:choose> 
    <xsl:when test="contains($name,$pre)"> 
     <xsl:value-of select="substring-after($name,$pre)"/> 
    </xsl:when> 
    <xsl:otherwise> 
     <xsl:value-of select="$name"/> 
    </xsl:otherwise> 
   </xsl:choose> 
  </xsl:variable> 
  <xsl:value-of select="$npName"/> 
 </xsl:template> 
 <!-- ==================================================== --> 
 <xsl:template name="removeSuffix"> 
  <xsl:param name="name"/> 
  <xsl:param name="suf"/> 
  <xsl:variable name="nsName"> 
   <xsl:choose> 
    <xsl:when test="contains($name,$suf)"> 
     <xsl:value-of select="substring-before($name,$suf)"/> 
    </xsl:when> 
    <xsl:otherwise> 
     <xsl:value-of select="$name"/> 
    </xsl:otherwise> 
   </xsl:choose> 
  </xsl:variable> 
  <xsl:value-of select="$nsName"/> 
 </xsl:template> 
 <!-- ==================================================== --> 
 <xsl:template name="lowerLeading"> 
  <xsl:param name="name"/> 
  <xsl:variable name="ch1" select="substring($name, 1, 1)"/> 
  <xsl:variable name="lc1" 
select="translate($ch1,'ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ','abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz')"/> 
  <xsl:value-of select="concat($lc1, substring($name, 2))"/> 
 </xsl:template> 
 <!-- ==================================================== --> 
 <xsl:template name="uniqueList"> 
  <xsl:param name="list"/> 
  <xsl:param name="sep"/> 
  <xsl:param name="seen"/> 
  <xsl:param name="pre">../base/</xsl:param> 
  <xsl:if test="$list != ''"> 
   <xsl:variable name="first" select="substring-before($list, $sep)"/> 
   <xsl:variable name="firstSep" select="concat($first,$sep)"/> 
   <xsl:variable name="rest" select="substring-after($list, $sep)"/> 
   <xsl:choose> 
    <xsl:when test="contains($seen,$firstSep)"> 
     <xsl:call-template name="uniqueList"> 
      <xsl:with-param name="list" select="$rest"/> 
      <xsl:with-param name="sep" select="$sep"/> 
      <xsl:with-param name="seen" select="$seen"/> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 545 
 


 


     </xsl:call-template> 
    </xsl:when> 
    <xsl:otherwise> 
     <xsl:value-of select="$firstSep"/> 
     <xsl:variable name="nowSeen" select="concat($seen, $firstSep)"/> 
     <xsl:call-template name="uniqueList"> 
      <xsl:with-param name="list" select="$rest"/> 
      <xsl:with-param name="sep" select="$sep"/> 
      <xsl:with-param name="seen" select="$nowSeen"/> 
     </xsl:call-template> 
    </xsl:otherwise> 
   </xsl:choose> 
  </xsl:if> 
 </xsl:template> 
 <!-- ==================================================== --> 
 <xsl:template name="getIncludedDocs"> 
  <xsl:param name="docName"/> 
  <xsl:param name="usePre"/> 
  <xsl:param name="seenList"/> 
  <xsl:param name="sep">,</xsl:param> 
  <xsl:value-of select="$docName"/> 
  <xsl:text>,</xsl:text> 
  <xsl:variable name="pathPre"> 
   <xsl:call-template name="getPathPrefix"> 
    <xsl:with-param name="file" select="$docName"/> 
   </xsl:call-template> 
  </xsl:variable> 
  <xsl:variable name="callPathPre"> 
   <xsl:choose> 
    <xsl:when test="$pathPre = '' or $pathPre = './' "> 
     <xsl:value-of select="$usePre"/> 
    </xsl:when> 
    <xsl:otherwise> 
     <xsl:value-of select="$pathPre"/> 
    </xsl:otherwise> 
   </xsl:choose> 
  </xsl:variable> 
  <xsl:for-each select="document($docName, / )"> 
   <xsl:for-each select="//xsd:include | //xsd:import"> 
    <xsl:variable name="iDoc" select="@schemaLocation"/> 
    <xsl:variable name="iPathPre"> 
     <xsl:call-template name="getPathPrefix"> 
      <xsl:with-param name="file" select="$iDoc"/> 
     </xsl:call-template> 
    </xsl:variable> 
    <xsl:variable name="iDocSuf"> 
     <xsl:call-template name="removePrefix"> 
      <xsl:with-param name="name" select="$iDoc"/> 
      <xsl:with-param name="pre" select="$iPathPre"/> 
     </xsl:call-template> 
    </xsl:variable> 
    <xsl:variable name="usePathPre"> 
     <xsl:choose> 
      <xsl:when test="$iPathPre = '' or $iPathPre = './' "> 
       <xsl:value-of select="$callPathPre"/> 
      </xsl:when> 
      <xsl:otherwise> 
       <xsl:value-of select="$iPathPre"/> 
      </xsl:otherwise> 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


546  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


     </xsl:choose> 
    </xsl:variable> 
    <xsl:variable name="uDoc"> 
     <xsl:value-of select="concat($usePathPre,$iDocSuf)"/> 
    </xsl:variable> 
    <xsl:variable name="uDocSep"> 
     <xsl:value-of select="concat($uDoc,$sep)"/> 
    </xsl:variable> 
    <xsl:if test="not(contains($seenList,$uDocSep))"> 
     <xsl:variable name="seenListPlus" select="concat($seenList,$uDocSep)"/>  
      <xsl:call-template name="getIncludedDocs"> 
      <xsl:with-param name="docName" select="$uDoc"/> 
      <xsl:with-param name="usePre" select="$usePathPre"/> 
      <xsl:with-param name="seenList" select="$seenListPlus"/> 
     </xsl:call-template> 
    </xsl:if> 
   </xsl:for-each> 
  </xsl:for-each> 
 </xsl:template> 
 <!-- ==================================================== --> 
 <xsl:template name="getDocumentList"> 
  <xsl:param name="list"/> 
  <xsl:param name="seenList"/> 
  <xsl:param name="usePre"/> 
  <xsl:if test="$list != ''"> 
   <xsl:variable name="first" select="substring-before($list, ',')"/> 
   <xsl:variable name="rest" select="substring-after($list, ',')"/> 
   <xsl:variable name="included"> 
    <xsl:call-template name="getIncludedDocs"> 
     <xsl:with-param name="docName" select="$first"/> 
     <xsl:with-param name="usePre" select="$usePre"/> 
     <xsl:with-param name="seenList" select="$seenList"/> 
    </xsl:call-template> 
   </xsl:variable> 
   <xsl:value-of select="$included"/> 
   <xsl:variable name="seenListIncluded" select="concat($seenList,$included)"/> 
   <xsl:if test="contains($rest,',')"> 
    <xsl:call-template name="getDocumentList"> 
     <xsl:with-param name="list" select="$rest"/> 
     <xsl:with-param name="seenList" select="$seenListIncluded"/> 
     <xsl:with-param name="usePre" select="$usePre"/> 
    </xsl:call-template> 
   </xsl:if> 
  </xsl:if> 
 </xsl:template> 
 <!-- ==================================================== --> 
 <xsl:template name="getUniqueSchemaList"> 
  <xsl:param name="list"/> 
  <xsl:param name="usePre"/> 
  <xsl:variable name="allSchemas"> 
   <xsl:call-template name="getDocumentList"> 
    <xsl:with-param name="list" select="$list"/> 
    <xsl:with-param name="usePre" select="$usePre"/> 
   </xsl:call-template> 
  </xsl:variable> 
  <xsl:variable name="uniqueSchemas"> 
   <xsl:call-template name="uniqueList"> 
    <xsl:with-param name="list" select="$allSchemas"/> 
    <xsl:with-param name="sep">,</xsl:with-param> 
   </xsl:call-template> 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 547 
 


 


  </xsl:variable> 
  <xsl:value-of select="$uniqueSchemas"/>  
 </xsl:template> 
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
   <xsl:template name="Separator"> 
    <xsl:param name="comment" select="'=========='"/> 
    <xsl:text>&#xA;</xsl:text> 
    <xsl:text disable-output-escaping="yes"> 
       &lt;!-- ==================</xsl:text><xsl:value-of select="$comment"/><xsl:text disable-output-
escaping="yes">===================== --&gt; 
   </xsl:text>   
 <!-- =========================================================== --> 
  </xsl:template> 
</xsl:stylesheet> 
 
 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


548  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


Bibliography 


ISO 31 (all parts), Quantities and units. 


ISO 1000, SI units and recommendations for the use of their multiples and of certain other units. 


Cover Pages Technology Report  at http://xml.coverpages.org/geographyML.html 


Langran, G. Time in Geographic Information Systems. London: Taylor & Francis Ltd. 1992. 


Kaufman, M. & Wagner D.  Drawing Graphs, Springer LNCS 2025, 1998. 


Battista, G., Eades P., Tamassia R. & Tollis I. Graph Drawing, Prentice Hall 1999. 


 


 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 549 
 


 


Index 


_ 


_association  24, 25, 26, 607 
_ContinuousCoverage  248, 249 
_CoordinateOperation  150, 152, 155, 310, 311 
_CoordinateReferenceSystem  111, 112, 114, 115, 116, 118, 119, 120, 326, 327, 328, 329, 332, 333 
_CoordinateSystem  127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 338, 339, 340, 341, 342, 343 
_Coverage  14, 24, 247, 248, 263, 344, 606 
_CRS  24, 107, 108, 111, 113, 325, 326, 453 
_Curve  49, 50, 55, 56, 57, 58, 60, 63, 64, 65, 68, 69, 71, 72, 76, 88, 395, 404, 407, 409, 410, 412, 415, 416, 418, 420, 421, 422, 575, 579, 583 
_CurveSegment  55, 56, 57, 58, 60, 63, 64, 65, 69, 71, 72, 409, 410, 412, 415, 416, 418, 420, 421, 422, 575, 583 
_Datum  137, 139, 143, 144, 145, 146, 356, 357, 358, 359 
_DiscreteCoverage  248, 348, 349, 350, 351 
_Feature  13, 24, 32, 35, 39, 40, 41, 239, 240, 248, 249, 268, 284, 344, 378, 450, 574, 581, 582, 607 
_FeatureCollection  40, 607 
_GeneralConversion  153, 154, 157, 313 
_GeneralDerivedCRS  112, 116, 117, 330, 331 
_GeneralOperationParameter  164, 165, 166, 321, 323 
_generalParameterValue  159, 161, 162, 316, 318 
_GeneralTransformation  154, 155, 158, 315 
_GeometricAggregate  90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 96, 380, 381, 383, 384, 385, 386 
_GeometricPrimitive  47, 48, 49, 51, 85, 392, 393, 394, 399, 435 
_Geometry  13, 34, 43, 44, 48, 89, 90, 232, 240, 249, 284, 345, 379, 380, 390, 391, 392, 398, 401, 406, 444, 450, 481, 579 
_GML  13, 23, 24, 29, 32, 43, 183, 196, 204, 207, 268, 269, 271, 272, 273, 276, 284, 364, 365, 366, 367, 368, 371, 375, 377, 390, 440, 455, 461 
_GriddedSurface  78, 80, 430, 431 
_ImplicitGeometry  244, 444 
_MetaData  13, 30, 31, 441, 443 
_Object  23, 24, 25, 27, 29, 30, 172, 231, 240, 439, 440, 442, 470, 482 
_Operation  152, 153, 154, 312, 313, 314 
_ParametricCurveSurface  77, 79, 429 
_positionalAccuracy  150, 153, 154, 169, 170, 309, 313, 315, 352, 353 
_reference  26, 27 
_ReferenceSystem  13, 106, 107, 452 
_Ring  53, 76, 402, 428 
_ScalarValue  229, 230, 231, 236, 250, 292, 345, 482, 483, 486 
_ScalarValueList  230, 231, 250, 345, 482, 483 
_SingleOperation  152, 156, 311, 312 
_Solid  85, 86, 89, 405, 436, 579 
_strictAssociation  26, 441 
_Style  267, 268, 269, 364, 536, 541 
_Surface  51, 52, 73, 74, 75, 77, 88, 400, 401, 404, 425, 426, 427, 428, 429, 579 
_SurfacePatch  73, 74, 75, 77, 427, 428, 429 
_TimeComplex  184, 185, 193, 466 
_TimeGeometricPrimitive  185, 186, 458 
_timeLength  190, 225, 458, 459 
_TimeObject  183, 185, 232, 249, 284, 345, 456, 457, 481 
_TimePrimitive  183, 184, 185, 192, 456, 457, 467 
_TimeReferenceSystem  462, 464, 465 
_TimeSlice  204, 206, 375, 376 
_TimeTopologyPrimitive  192, 193, 468 
_Topology  13, 24, 172, 180, 470, 476 
_TopoPrimitive  172, 173, 174, 175, 181, 471, 472, 473, 477 
_Value  24, 231, 232, 235, 251, 292, 346, 481, 482, 483, 484, 485 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


2  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


0 


0D  10 


1 


19100  xxi, 1, 12, 22, 188, 249, 490, 491, 547, 562, 565, 579, 593, 595, 597 
19103  2, 3, 5, 6, 22, 224, 445, 478, 491, 492, 547, 549, 562, 564, 565, 567, 571, 585, 592 
19107  2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 41, 50, 52, 57, 74, 87, 171, 395, 401, 409, 427, 492, 493, 495, 496, 501, 504, 508, 511, 512, 513, 514, 516, 520, 521 
19108  2, 182, 183, 184, 188, 189, 191, 196, 455, 460, 461, 463, 466, 521, 522, 523, 524, 525, 526, 527, 528, 529 
19109  2, 7, 21, 31, 39, 283, 287, 490, 529, 530, 562, 563, 564, 565, 569, 579, 585, 592 
19111  3, 4, 5, 6, 98, 99, 103, 111, 124, 136, 150, 169, 308, 325, 335, 351, 354, 451, 530, 531, 532 
19112  491, 532 
19115  2, 31, 103, 168, 275, 451, 527, 533, 568, 580, 592 
19117  2, 491, 533, 534, 535, 536, 537, 538, 541, 542 
19118  1, 2, 445, 478, 490, 491, 530, 562, 567, 569, 577, 592 
19123  2, 5, 6, 7, 136, 242, 248, 249, 255, 257, 344, 347, 544, 545, 546, 547 
19139  2, 31, 533, 568, 580, 592 
1D  10, 14, 109, 110, 115, 120, 327, 333 


2 


2D  10, 12, 14, 52, 60, 62, 63, 64, 69, 70, 78, 79, 98, 109, 110, 117, 121, 123, 172, 173, 330, 401, 413, 414, 415, 416, 417, 430, 472 


3 


3D  10, 12, 14, 60, 62, 69, 70, 78, 81, 98, 99, 100, 108, 109, 115, 116, 123, 124, 171, 172, 176, 179, 327, 328, 413, 414, 417, 432, 475, 531 


A 


absoluteExternalPositionalAccuracy  169 
AbsoluteExternalPositionalAccuracyType  169, 352 
abstract  1, 8, 12, 22, 23, 24, 26, 27, 30, 32, 35, 39, 40, 42, 43, 44, 47, 48, 49, 51, 53, 55, 56, 73, 77, 79, 85, 90, 101, 102, 106, 107, 108, 110, 111, 112, 


125, 127, 137, 140, 142, 146, 149, 150, 152, 153, 154, 155, 159, 162, 164, 165, 166, 169, 172, 183, 185, 190, 192, 193, 203, 204, 206, 208, 229, 
231, 247, 248, 249, 268, 269, 284, 286, 291, 301, 308, 311, 312, 313, 314, 315, 316, 319, 321, 323, 325, 329, 335, 337, 344, 352, 354, 355, 358, 
360, 361, 364, 371, 375, 377, 378, 379, 380, 389, 390, 391, 392, 394, 399, 400, 401, 408, 426, 429, 435, 438, 439, 440, 441, 442, 444, 451, 452, 
453, 455, 456, 457, 459, 461, 462, 467, 470, 482, 492, 493, 495, 497, 498, 499, 503, 508, 509, 511, 512, 524, 531, 536, 537, 538, 541, 544, 564, 
566, 573, 574, 578, 587, 589, 595 


Abstract Specification  xxi, 1, 2, 31, 39, 98, 103, 111, 124, 136, 150, 168, 171, 242, 307, 309, 325, 332, 335, 351, 354, 356, 451 
AbstractContinuousCoverageType  248, 249, 292, 344 
AbstractCoordinateOperationBaseType  150, 308 
AbstractCoordinateOperationType  150, 152, 155, 308, 310, 311 
AbstractCoordinateReferenceSystemType  111, 112, 114, 115, 116, 118, 119, 120, 325, 327, 328, 329, 332, 333, 334 
AbstractCoordinateSystemBaseType  127, 337 
AbstractCoordinateSystemType  127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 337, 338, 339, 340, 341, 342, 343 
AbstractCoverageType  247, 248, 249, 258, 259, 261, 262, 263, 264, 344 
AbstractCRSType  107, 111, 113, 325, 326, 452 
AbstractCurveSegmentType  55, 56, 57, 59, 62, 64, 65, 69, 70, 71, 408, 409, 410, 412, 415, 416, 419, 420, 421, 423, 575, 583, 588 
AbstractCurveType  49, 50, 55, 68, 88, 394, 395, 404, 407, 408, 579, 588, 595 
AbstractDatumBaseType  137, 355 
AbstractDatumType  137, 139, 143, 144, 145, 146, 354, 356, 357, 358, 359 
AbstractDiscreteCoverageType  248, 257, 292, 344, 348, 349, 350, 351 
AbstractFeatureCollectionType  40, 41, 286, 378, 379, 573, 589, 591 
AbstractFeatureType  25, 28, 32, 39, 40, 41, 203, 239, 268, 270, 286, 287, 292, 301, 344, 376, 377, 378, 379, 450, 570, 573, 574, 581, 582, 587, 589, 


593, 595 
AbstractGeneralConversionType  153, 157, 313, 314 
AbstractGeneralDerivedCRSType  112, 117, 329, 330, 331 
abstractGeneralOperationParameterRef  164 
AbstractGeneralOperationParameterRefType  163, 164, 166, 167, 168, 320, 321, 322, 324 
AbstractGeneralOperationParameterType  164, 165, 166, 321, 323 
AbstractGeneralParameterValueType  159, 161, 162, 316, 317, 318 
AbstractGeneralTransformationType  154, 158, 314, 316 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 3 
 


 


AbstractGeometricAggregateType  87, 90, 91, 92, 94, 95, 96, 380, 381, 382, 383, 384, 385, 386, 387 
AbstractGeometricPrimitiveType  42, 47, 48, 49, 51, 85, 87, 392, 393, 394, 400, 435, 588 
AbstractGeometryType  33, 41, 42, 43, 44, 47, 53, 89, 90, 245, 288, 301, 380, 390, 392, 401, 406, 444, 579, 588, 595 
AbstractGMLType  7, 23, 24, 25, 27, 28, 29, 32, 39, 42, 172, 183, 196, 198, 204, 207, 208, 228, 232, 268, 269, 294, 301, 364, 365, 371, 375, 377, 391, 


439, 440, 456, 470, 483, 570, 572, 574, 587, 588, 590, 593, 594 
AbstractGriddedSurfaceType  78, 79, 80, 429, 431, 432 
AbstractMetaDataType  30, 31, 440, 441 
AbstractOperationType  152, 153, 154, 312, 313, 315 
AbstractParametricCurveSurfaceType  77, 78, 429, 430 
AbstractPositionalAccuracyType  169, 170, 352, 353 
AbstractReferenceSystemBaseType  106, 452 
AbstractReferenceSystemType  106, 107, 451, 452 
AbstractRingPropertyType  52, 53, 401, 402 
AbstractRingType  53, 75, 401, 402, 429 
AbstractSingleOperationType  152, 153, 156, 311, 312 
AbstractSolidType  85, 86, 89, 405, 435, 436, 579, 588, 595 
AbstractStyleType  268, 269, 364 
AbstractSurfacePatchType  73, 74, 75, 77, 426, 427, 428, 429, 588 
AbstractSurfaceType  51, 52, 73, 76, 88, 399, 401, 405, 425, 426, 579, 588, 595 
AbstractTimeComplexType  185, 193, 457, 467 
AbstractTimeGeometricPrimitiveType  185, 186, 457, 458 
AbstractTimeObjectType  183, 185, 290, 455, 456, 457 
AbstractTimePrimitiveType  183, 185, 192, 456, 457, 467 
AbstractTimeReferenceSystemType  461, 462, 463, 464, 465 
AbstractTimeSliceType  204, 205, 375 
AbstractTimeTopologyPrimitiveType  192, 467, 468, 469 
AbstractTopologyType  172, 177, 178, 179, 470, 474, 475, 476 
AbstractTopoPrimitiveType  172, 173, 174, 175, 470, 471, 472, 473 
actuate  25, 488 
AesheticCriteriaType  276, 369 
AffinePlacement  70, 71, 417, 419, 507 
AffinePlacementType  70, 417 
aggregation  25, 26, 184, 442, 457, 538, 566, 567, 573 
algorithm  83, 147, 149, 150, 162, 252, 254, 308, 319, 434 
anchorPoint  137, 138, 355 
angle  8, 56, 60, 62, 64, 78, 81, 98, 123, 133, 160, 213, 218, 219, 225, 227, 277, 447 
AngleChoiceType  143, 227, 361 
AngleType  62, 225, 237, 288, 374, 415, 416, 447, 492, 572, 597 
animate  366, 542 
animateColor  366, 542 
animateMotion  366, 542 
application domain  12, 215, 286, 287, 585 
application schema  1, 3, 12, 19, 20, 21, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 30, 35, 37, 38, 39, 56, 74, 78, 87, 189, 195, 203, 211, 231, 236, 251, 266, 267, 268, 270, 


271, 272, 277, 278, 280, 282, 283, 284, 285, 286, 287, 288, 289, 290, 291, 292, 293, 294, 295, 296, 297, 298, 301, 302, 363, 364, 372, 373, 377, 
437, 442, 482, 490, 522, 529, 530, 533, 562, 568, 569, 581, 585, 586, 587, 588, 589, 590, 591, 592, 593, 594, 595, 598, 599 


Arc  57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 226, 410, 411, 412, 414, 415, 416, 448, 449 
ArcByBulge  61, 414 
ArcByBulgeType  61, 414 
ArcByCenterPoint  62, 63, 64, 415, 416, 554 
ArcByCenterPointType  62, 63, 415, 416 
ArcMinutesType  226, 448 
arcrole  25, 488 
ArcSecondsType  226, 449 
ArcString  57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 410, 411, 412, 414 
ArcStringByBulge  59, 60, 61, 412, 414 
ArcStringByBulgeType  59, 60, 61, 412, 414 
ArcStringType  57, 58, 410, 411 
ArcType  58, 59, 411, 412 
AreaType  224, 492, 572, 582, 597 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


4  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


Array  29, 91, 92, 93, 95, 97, 181, 233, 285, 286, 378, 440, 442, 477, 607 
Array XE "Array" AssociationType  29, 286 
ArrayAssociationType  29, 181, 285, 378, 442, 477 
ArrayType  29, 440 
association  3, 6, 7, 15, 21, 22, 24, 25, 26, 29, 40, 41, 99, 100, 109, 113, 130, 131, 148, 158, 162, 198, 210, 211, 286, 314, 319, 326, 339, 340, 378, 441, 


442, 463, 469, 471, 472, 473, 474, 475, 476, 477, 493, 511, 512, 513, 514, 517, 520, 521, 523, 525, 530, 535, 539, 540, 545, 566, 567, 570, 572, 
573, 574, 575, 576, 577, 578, 579, 594, 597, 598, 599, 607 


AssociationAttributeGroup  24, 25, 26, 27, 30, 34, 35, 43, 48, 49, 51, 54, 85, 89, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 107, 108, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 
118, 119, 120, 121, 126, 128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 139, 141, 143, 144, 145, 146, 152, 153, 154, 155, 156, 157, 158, 159, 164, 165, 166, 
168, 173, 174, 175, 176, 177, 180, 181, 182, 184, 186, 187, 192, 194, 201, 209, 232, 236, 240, 249, 251, 267, 268, 269, 271, 272, 273, 274, 276, 
286, 288, 310, 311, 312, 313, 314, 315, 316, 320, 321, 323, 324, 326, 327, 328, 329, 330, 331, 332, 333, 334, 337, 338, 339, 340, 341, 342, 343, 
345, 346, 351, 356, 357, 358, 359, 360, 361, 362, 364, 365, 366, 367, 368, 369, 372, 374, 378, 379, 381, 382, 383, 384, 385, 386, 387, 390, 392, 
394, 395, 399, 400, 403, 404, 405, 406, 436, 442, 443, 444, 450, 452, 453, 456, 458, 464, 465, 466, 467, 468, 469, 470, 471, 472, 473, 474, 477, 
485, 574, 577, 582, 583, 594 


AssociationType  24, 26, 27, 35, 39, 240, 285, 369, 378, 441, 450, 589, 590, 591 
attribute  3, 5, 7, 15, 18, 19, 20, 21, 23, 24, 25, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 35, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 


69, 70, 72, 74, 75, 76, 77, 79, 80, 87, 104, 106, 118, 125, 126, 127, 137, 138, 140, 142, 144, 145, 146, 150, 153, 154, 162, 164, 165, 167, 172, 173, 
174, 175, 176, 180, 181, 182, 184, 185, 188, 190, 204, 208, 210, 211, 212, 213, 214, 215, 216, 224, 226, 227, 230, 231, 234, 238, 242, 243, 245, 
248, 249, 250, 252, 255, 256, 267, 268, 269, 270, 271, 272, 273, 274, 275, 276, 284, 285, 301, 492, 493, 495, 497, 502, 503, 504, 506, 508, 509, 
514, 516, 519, 521, 522, 523, 525, 526, 527, 528, 531, 532, 536, 539, 541, 543, 544, 566, 570, 572, 575, 576, 578, 579, 586, 587, 589, 594, 602, 
603, 604, 605, 606 


axisAbbrev  43, 125, 126, 336, 392 
axisDirection  125, 126, 336 
axisID  125, 335 
axisName  125, 245, 246, 256, 264, 265, 335 


B 


Bag  29, 440 
BagType  29, 440 
bandwidth  278 
baseCRS  112, 329 
baseCurve  68, 69, 407, 408, 498, 507 
BaseStyleDescriptorType  271, 272, 273, 276, 366, 367, 368, 369, 607 
baseSurface  76, 77, 425, 426, 498 
BaseUnit  214, 217, 218, 479 
BaseUnitType  214, 479 
basicTypes.xsd  14, 211, 224, 228, 296, 303, 390, 439, 445, 446, 547, 601 
Bezier  67, 68, 424 
BezierType  67, 424 
boolean  18, 19, 20, 230, 572 
Boolean  229, 230, 236, 292, 486 
booleanList  19 
BooleanList  229, 230 
booleanOrNull  18, 19, 20, 230, 304, 482, 572 
booleanOrNullList  19, 230, 482, 572 
BooleanPropertyType  236 
booleanValue  160, 317 
boundary  3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 38, 42, 52, 53, 73, 74, 75, 76, 81, 84, 86, 87, 88, 89, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 176, 179, 191, 192, 401, 402, 405, 425, 427, 428, 


432, 434, 436, 471, 472, 473, 493, 496, 501, 509, 520, 553 
boundedBy  32, 33, 39, 40, 41, 239, 247, 258, 259, 261, 262, 263, 264, 348, 349, 350, 351, 377, 379, 544 
BoundedFeatureType  39, 247 
boundingBox  105, 454 
boundingPolygon  105, 106, 454 
BoundingShapeType  33, 377 
Box  i, 33, 41 
BSpline  65, 66, 67, 422, 424, 506 
BSplineType  65, 67, 422, 424 
by reference  15, 24, 25, 26, 27, 187, 193, 209, 238, 285, 372, 442 
by value  24, 25, 193, 442, 574, 575 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 5 
 


 


C 


CalDate  189, 198, 461, 525 
calendar  xxii, 185, 188, 189, 195, 197, 198, 199, 457, 460, 464, 465, 525, 528 
CartesianCS  116, 129, 329, 339 
cartesianCSRef  129 
CartesianCSRefType  116, 129, 329, 339 
CartesianCSType  129, 339 
catalog  214, 480 
catalogSymbol  43, 213, 217, 218, 219, 220, 221, 222, 223, 392, 479 
category  3, 4, 8, 117, 136, 228, 331, 571 
Category  230, 233, 235, 236, 250, 292, 293, 485, 486 
CategoryExtent  235, 485 
CategoryExtentType  235, 485 
CategoryList  230, 250, 292 
CategoryPropertyType  236 
centerLineOf  11, 37, 268 
centerOf  37 
child  3, 7, 23, 24, 286, 287, 292, 294, 295, 301, 463 
Circle  59, 63, 412, 416 
CircleByCenterPoint  63, 64, 416, 554 
CircleByCenterPointType  63, 416 
CircleType  59, 412 
class  3, 8, 10, 13, 22, 25, 35, 41, 103, 110, 111, 124, 149, 171, 203, 204, 210, 228, 280, 301, 302, 325, 439, 442, 451, 491, 493, 495, 496, 498, 501, 


507, 511, 512, 514, 516, 520, 522, 524, 527, 530, 531, 532, 536, 537, 538, 539, 540, 541, 543, 544, 545, 546, 547, 549, 562, 563, 564, 565, 566, 
567, 569, 570, 571, 572, 573, 574, 575, 576, 578, 579, 586, 593, 595, 597, 598, 599 


closure  4, 5 
Clothoid  70, 71, 418, 507 
ClothoidType  70, 71, 418 
coboundary  171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 176, 472, 473 
code  18, 20, 28, 34, 104, 118, 126, 138, 144, 145, 163, 169, 210, 211, 213, 214, 217, 218, 219, 220, 221, 222, 228, 230, 233, 234, 235, 236, 238, 262, 


292, 492, 571, 597 
code space  104, 453 
codelist  4, 230, 482 
CodeListType  20 
CodeOrNullListType  20, 21, 228, 230, 235, 292, 482, 485 
codespace  4 
codeSpace  18, 20, 28, 34, 104, 118, 126, 138, 144, 145, 210, 211, 214, 217, 218, 219, 220, 221, 222, 230, 233, 234, 235, 238, 262 
CodeType  18, 28, 34, 104, 118, 126, 138, 144, 145, 163, 169, 213, 214, 228, 230, 236, 292, 320, 331, 336, 352, 355, 357, 374, 379, 443, 453, 480, 482, 


492, 571, 597 
columnIndex  170, 171, 353 
CompassPoint  206, 236, 237, 238, 241, 242, 374 
CompassPointEnumeration  237, 374 
composite curve  4, 76, 87, 88, 404, 428, 429, 496 
composite solid  4, 89, 405 
composite surface  4, 86, 88, 404, 405, 436, 496 
CompositeCurve  36, 76, 87, 88, 89, 404, 406, 496, 498, 499, 513, 579, 588, 595 
CompositeCurveType  88, 404, 579, 588, 595 
CompositeSolid  36, 87, 89, 405, 406, 579, 588, 595 
CompositeSolidType  89, 405, 579, 588, 595 
CompositeSurface  36, 87, 88, 89, 404, 405, 406, 513, 579, 588, 595 
CompositeSurfaceType  88, 404, 579, 588, 595 
CompositeValue  232, 233, 234, 251, 252, 253, 256, 260, 262, 264, 265, 483, 484 
CompositeValueType  232, 234, 483, 484 
composition  25, 158, 159, 162, 228, 229, 314, 316, 318, 319, 442, 530, 567, 573, 599 
CompoundCRS  113, 326 
compoundCRSRef  113 
CompoundCRSRefType  113, 326 
CompoundCRSType  113, 326 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


6  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


ConcatenatedOperation  155, 156, 310 
concatenatedOperationRef  156 
ConcatenatedOperationRefType  156, 310 
ConcatenatedOperationType  155, 310 
conceptual  1, 3, 12, 17, 24, 31, 73, 171, 182, 183, 242, 243, 425, 490, 492, 530, 533, 541, 544, 547, 548, 560 
conceptual schema language  12, 17, 547 
Cone  79, 80, 430, 509 
ConeType  79, 80, 430 
conformance  1, 2, 11, 12, 168, 280, 287, 294, 297, 298, 299, 301, 302, 307, 325, 335, 351, 354, 363, 443, 445, 451, 459, 478, 513, 514, 520, 521, 529, 


533, 542, 543, 547, 562, 586 
container  172, 177, 470, 471 
ContainerPropertyType  177, 471 
control point  4, 50, 53, 54, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 72, 79, 80, 81, 84, 135, 168, 395, 402, 409, 410, 411, 412, 413, 414, 415, 416, 


420, 421, 422, 423, 424, 425, 430, 431, 432, 435, 493, 552 
convenience  17, 23, 25, 28, 31, 33, 41, 98, 171, 184, 203, 213, 224, 227, 231, 232, 236, 282 
ConventionalUnit  214, 215, 221, 223, 479 
ConventionalUnitType  215, 479 
conversion  5, 101, 102, 110, 112, 117, 147, 148, 151, 153, 154, 157, 158, 215, 216, 218, 222, 309, 313, 314, 329, 330, 331, 479, 480, 530, 532, 569, 


592 
Conversion  157, 158, 216, 313, 314, 480 
conversionRef  158 
ConversionRefType  158, 314 
conversionToPreferredUnit  215, 216, 221, 223, 479 
ConversionToPreferredUnitType  216, 480 
ConversionType  157, 313 
coord  45, 46, 47, 48, 50, 53, 57, 58, 60, 61, 62, 64, 65, 67, 111, 112, 114, 115, 116, 119, 120, 121, 126, 128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 150, 151, 


152, 153, 154, 156, 308, 310, 311, 313, 315, 327, 328, 329, 330, 332, 333, 334, 338, 339, 340, 341, 342, 343, 393, 396, 398, 403, 410, 411, 412, 
413, 414, 415, 421, 423, 424 


coordinate  xxi, 4, 5, 6, 7, 33, 41, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 50, 53, 54, 55, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 66, 68, 72, 87, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 106, 
107, 108, 109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, 120, 121, 122, 123, 124, 125, 126, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 135, 
136, 137, 139, 143, 144, 146, 147, 148, 149, 150, 151, 152, 153, 155, 156, 157, 158, 162, 168, 169, 188, 195, 196, 202, 207, 242, 245, 249, 251, 
277, 281, 291, 292, 294, 295, 307, 308, 309, 310, 311, 312, 313, 314, 315, 319, 325, 326, 327, 328, 329, 330, 331, 332, 333, 334, 335, 336, 337, 
338, 339, 340, 341, 342, 343, 351, 352, 354, 356, 358, 359, 391, 392, 393, 395, 396, 397, 398, 402, 407, 409, 410, 411, 413, 414, 421, 423, 424, 
445, 451, 452, 453, 460, 462, 465, 492, 502, 528, 531, 532, 545 


coordinate reference system  xxi, 4, 5, 7, 33, 41, 43, 44, 45, 47, 50, 54, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 64, 66, 68, 72, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 106, 107, 108, 
109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, 120, 121, 122, 123, 126, 127, 134, 135, 136, 137, 143, 144, 146, 147, 148, 150, 151, 153, 
155, 158, 168, 207, 249, 277, 281, 291, 292, 294, 295, 308, 309, 310, 312, 315, 316, 325, 326, 327, 328, 329, 330, 331, 332, 333, 334, 336, 337, 
354, 356, 358, 391, 395, 396, 397, 402, 410, 411, 413, 414, 421, 423, 424, 445, 452, 453, 531, 545 


coordinate system  xxi, 4, 5, 6, 55, 60, 62, 87, 107, 108, 109, 111, 114, 115, 116, 118, 120, 121, 122, 123, 124, 125, 126, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 
133, 134, 135, 137, 139, 148, 149, 168, 188, 195, 196, 202, 325, 327, 328, 329, 331, 333, 334, 335, 336, 337, 338, 339, 340, 341, 342, 343, 354, 
359, 407, 413, 414, 452, 462, 465, 492, 528 


coordinate tuple  4, 46, 47, 48, 50, 53, 57, 99, 109, 115, 121, 122, 123, 126, 127, 147, 148, 149, 156, 157, 245, 251, 311, 327, 336, 337, 392, 393, 395, 
398, 402, 409 


coordinateOperationID  150, 151, 153, 154, 308, 313, 315 
coordinateOperationName  150, 151, 153, 154, 308, 313, 315 
coordinateOperationRef  152, 156, 310, 311 
CoordinateOperationRefType  152, 156, 309, 310, 311 
coordinateOperations.xsd  98, 103, 111, 149, 307, 325, 451, 601 
coordinateReferenceSystemRef  111, 112, 114, 115, 116, 119, 120, 121, 327, 328, 329, 330, 332, 333, 334 
CoordinateReferenceSystemRefType  111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 119, 120, 121, 325, 326, 327, 328, 329, 330, 332, 333, 334 
coordinateReferenceSystems.xsd  42, 97, 103, 110, 150, 278, 324, 325, 391, 438, 451, 601 
coordinates  45, 47, 48, 50, 53, 57, 58, 60, 61, 62, 64, 65, 67, 393, 396, 398, 403, 410, 411, 412, 413, 414, 415, 421, 423, 424 
CoordinatesType  45, 46, 251, 346, 398, 572 
CoordinateSystemAxis  125, 126, 128, 335, 336, 338 
CoordinateSystemAxisBaseType  125, 335 
coordinateSystemAxisRef  126 
CoordinateSystemAxisRefType  126, 128, 336, 338 
CoordinateSystemAxisType  125, 335 
coordinateSystemRef  128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 338, 339, 340, 341, 342, 343 
CoordinateSystemRefType  118, 128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 331, 338, 339, 340, 341, 342, 343 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 7 
 


 


coordinateSystems.xsd  98, 111, 124, 325, 334, 601 
CoordType  46, 398 
Count  230, 235, 236, 292, 293, 485, 487 
CountExtent  235, 236, 485 
CountExtentType  235, 485 
CountList  230, 293 
CountPropertyType  236 
covariance  168, 170, 171, 353 
CovarianceElementType  170, 353 
covarianceMatrix  170 
CovarianceMatrixType  170, 353 
coverage  xxi, 5, 12, 14, 212, 242, 243, 244, 247, 248, 249, 250, 252, 254, 255, 257, 259, 260, 261, 262, 263, 264, 278, 292, 293, 343, 344, 345, 347, 


348, 349, 350, 438, 545, 547, 561, 601 
coverage.xsd  244, 247, 278, 292, 343, 438, 601 
coverageFunction  248, 249, 254, 258, 259, 261, 262, 263, 264, 344, 345, 348, 349, 350, 351 
CoverageFunctionType  254, 345 
CRS  9, 24, 42, 43, 44, 45, 47, 99, 100, 101, 103, 104, 105, 107, 108, 109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 118, 119, 120, 121, 122, 124, 126, 134, 


135, 136, 138, 145, 147, 148, 150, 151, 163, 282, 290, 308, 309, 320, 325, 327, 328, 329, 330, 331, 332, 333, 334, 336, 355, 357, 391, 392, 396, 
397, 451, 452, 453, 454, 495, 531, 532, 580 


crsRef  108, 111, 113, 325, 326 
CRSRefType  108, 111, 113, 151, 309, 325, 326, 453 
csID  127, 128, 337 
csName  127, 337 
CSV  9, 250, 307 
CT  9 
CubicSpline  64, 65, 421, 493 
CubicSplineType  64, 421 
curve  4, 5, 6, 11, 44, 45, 49, 50, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 76, 77, 78, 79, 81, 87, 88, 93, 126, 173, 176, 178, 


186, 259, 336, 383, 391, 394, 395, 404, 407, 408, 409, 410, 411, 412, 413, 414, 415, 416, 417, 418, 419, 420, 421, 422, 423, 424, 425, 428, 429, 
430, 432, 472, 474, 496, 504, 505, 506, 511, 513, 552, 554, 579 


Curve  36, 37, 49, 50, 55, 56, 57, 58, 60, 62, 64, 65, 67, 68, 69, 72, 76, 79, 80, 88, 93, 379, 388, 394, 395, 407, 409, 410, 411, 413, 416, 420, 422, 423, 
425, 428, 431, 432, 498, 499, 506, 552, 578, 579, 588, 595 


curveArrayProperty  36, 50 
CurveArrayPropertyType  36, 50, 93, 388, 395 
CurveInterpolationType  56, 57, 58, 60, 62, 64, 65, 67, 72, 79, 80, 410, 411, 413, 416, 420, 422, 423, 425, 431, 432 
curveMember  75, 76, 88, 92, 93, 260, 383, 404, 429 
curveMembers  92, 93, 383 
curveProperty  49, 173, 394, 472, 607 
curveProperty, CurvePropertyType  36, 37, 49, 51, 68, 69, 76, 173, 517, 578, 579, 607 
CurvePropertyType  37, 49, 68, 69, 76, 379, 394, 407, 416, 428, 578, 579 
CurveSegment  55, 56, 57, 59, 62, 64, 65, 69, 70, 71, 575, 583, 588 
CurveSegmentArrayPropertyType  56, 409 
CurveType  55, 407, 579, 588, 595 
Cylinder  80, 431, 509 
CylinderType  80, 431 
CylindricalCS  133, 342, 343 
cylindricalCSRef  133 
CylindricalCSRefType  133, 342 
CylindricalCSType  133, 342 


D 


dangling  174, 175, 176, 472, 473 
data type  5, 8, 11, 13, 16, 44, 45, 282, 396, 446, 461, 524, 529, 555, 564, 565, 566, 567, 572, 576, 580, 587, 590, 591, 598, 599 
DataBlock  250, 251, 252, 256, 260, 265, 345, 346 
DataBlockType  250, 346 
dataQuality.xsd  98, 150, 168, 308, 351, 601 
dataSource  203, 204, 375, 376 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


8  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


datum  xxi, 4, 5, 6, 99, 107, 108, 111, 112, 114, 115, 119, 120, 121, 126, 134, 135, 136, 137, 138, 139, 140, 143, 144, 145, 146, 153, 158, 313, 315, 
325, 327, 328, 329, 332, 333, 334, 336, 354, 355, 356, 357, 358, 359, 360, 452 


datumID  137, 138, 146, 355, 358 
datumName  137, 138, 146, 354, 358 
datumRef  138, 139, 143, 144, 145, 146, 356, 357, 358, 359 
DatumRefType  138, 139, 143, 144, 145, 146, 355, 356, 357, 358, 359, 360 
datums.xsd  98, 111, 136, 325, 354, 601 
decimalMinutes  225, 226, 227, 448 
DecimalMinutesType  226, 448 
defaultStyle  267, 268, 535, 536, 541, 543 
defaultStyle.xsd  14, 266, 278, 363, 438, 601 
DefaultStylePropertyType  267, 363 
definedByConversion  112, 329 
definition  209, 210, 211 
Definition  3, 9, 106, 125, 127, 137, 140, 141, 142, 150, 162, 164, 195, 196, 198, 200, 207, 208, 209, 210, 211, 212, 213, 217, 218, 222, 223, 280, 293, 


295, 308, 319, 321, 335, 337, 354, 360, 361, 371, 372, 373, 451, 462, 463, 464, 478, 479 
DefinitionCollection  207, 208, 210, 211, 217, 218, 222, 223 
definitionMember  208, 209, 210, 211 
DefinitionProxy  209, 210, 211, 373 
DefinitionProxyType  209, 373 
definitionRef  209, 210, 211, 373 
DefinitionType  106, 125, 127, 137, 140, 142, 150, 151, 162, 163, 164, 165, 167, 195, 196, 198, 200, 207, 208, 209, 213, 295, 308, 319, 321, 335, 337, 


354, 360, 361, 371, 372, 373, 451, 462, 463, 464, 479 
degrees  56, 78, 81, 98, 99, 108, 168, 218, 225, 226, 227, 447 
DegreesType  226, 448 
DegreeValueType  226, 448 
deprecate  xx, 9 
derivation  23, 25, 39, 147, 155, 158, 208, 222, 257, 270, 281, 284, 285, 296, 315, 316, 499, 512, 525, 530, 578, 606 
derivationUnitTerm  214, 215, 218, 219, 220, 221, 222, 223, 479 
DerivationUnitTermType  215, 480 
DerivedCRS  117, 118, 331, 332 
derivedCRSRef  118 
DerivedCRSRefType  118, 331 
derivedCRSType  117, 331 
DerivedCRSType  117, 331 
DerivedCRSTypeType  117, 331 
DerivedUnit  214, 215, 218, 219, 220, 221, 222, 223, 479 
DerivedUnitType  214, 479 
description  1, 8, 11, 14, 15, 24, 25, 26, 28, 39, 42, 46, 99, 104, 105, 121, 122, 145, 169, 182, 183, 185, 186, 188, 196, 197, 198, 199, 201, 207, 208, 


210, 211, 212, 213, 217, 218, 222, 223, 224, 239, 242, 243, 244, 250, 251, 254, 265, 267, 274, 283, 295, 302, 371, 439, 454, 491, 495, 516, 522, 
527, 529, 533, 537, 539, 540, 569, 592 


dictionary  xxii, 14, 18, 20, 104, 207, 208, 209, 210, 212, 217, 230, 295, 305, 306, 371, 372, 373, 461, 478, 482, 549, 569, 578, 601 
Dictionary  8, 107, 126, 128, 138, 141, 143, 152, 164, 207, 208, 209, 210, 211, 217, 224, 283, 295, 309, 320, 321, 336, 338, 356, 361, 362, 371, 372, 


452, 549 
dictionary.xsd  104, 295, 371, 461, 478, 601 
dictionaryEntry  107, 126, 128, 138, 141, 143, 152, 164, 208, 209, 210, 211, 217, 218, 219, 220, 221, 222, 223, 224, 309, 320, 321, 336, 338, 355, 361, 


362, 372, 452 
DictionaryEntryType  107, 126, 128, 138, 141, 143, 152, 164, 208, 209, 309, 320, 321, 336, 338, 356, 361, 362, 372, 452 
DictionaryType  208, 295, 371 
dimension  43, 47, 70, 87, 98, 121, 123, 171, 176, 179, 185, 245, 246, 251, 256, 260, 261, 262, 263, 265, 344, 389, 390, 391, 398, 418, 444, 502, 554, 


555 
direct position  4, 5, 6, 41, 44, 45, 47, 48, 50, 54, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 63, 65, 70, 72, 187, 242, 248, 249, 344, 391, 395, 397, 398, 402, 410, 411, 413, 


414, 415, 418, 421 
directed  6, 14, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 176, 178, 179, 191, 193, 276, 277, 289, 369, 466, 472, 473, 474, 475, 519, 520, 555 
directedEdge  172, 174, 178, 471, 472, 473, 474, 607 
DirectedEdgePropertyType  174, 472, 580 
directedFace  173, 175, 178, 472, 473, 475, 607 
DirectedFacePropertyType  175, 473, 580 
directedNode  173, 177, 471, 472, 474, 607 
DirectedNodePropertyType  173, 289, 290, 471, 580 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 9 
 


 


DirectedObservation  239, 241, 242, 450 
DirectedObservationAtDistance  241, 242, 450 
DirectedObservationAtDistanceType  242, 450 
DirectedObservationType  241, 242, 450 
directedTopoSolid  174, 175, 176, 179, 473, 475 
DirectedTopoSolidPropertyType  175, 176, 473, 580 
direction  236, 237, 238, 241, 242, 450 
direction.xsd  47, 236, 373, 375, 449, 601 
DirectionPropertyType  205, 236, 373, 375 
DirectionVector  236, 237, 374 
DirectionVectorType  237, 374 
DirectPositionListType  44, 45, 396 
DirectPositionType  44, 46, 47, 48, 50, 54, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 63, 64, 66, 68, 70, 72, 396, 397, 398, 418 
dmsAngle  160, 225, 226, 227, 317, 447 
DMSAngleType  160, 225, 317, 447 
dmsAngleValue  160, 317 
domain  xxi, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 12, 31, 39, 48, 49, 51, 54, 85, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 105, 106, 195, 242, 243, 248, 249, 250, 254, 255, 257, 258, 259, 


260, 262, 263, 264, 283, 286, 287, 291, 344, 345, 347, 348, 349, 350, 381, 382, 383, 384, 385, 386, 387, 392, 393, 395, 399, 400, 403, 406, 435, 
454, 455, 462, 545, 575, 578, 585 


domainSet  247, 248, 249, 256, 258, 259, 260, 261, 262, 344, 348, 349, 350, 351 
DomainSetType  249, 258, 263, 264, 345, 348, 349, 350, 351 
double  18, 19, 20, 21, 44, 251, 572 
doubleList  19, 21, 44, 306, 396, 397 
doubleOrNull  18, 19, 20, 21, 250, 251, 252, 260, 265, 305, 307, 346, 572 
doubleOrNullList  19, 21, 251, 307, 346, 572 
doubleOrNullTupleList  250, 251, 252, 260, 265, 346 
DrawingTypeType  276, 369 
DTD  9 
duration  xxii, 38, 182, 185, 186, 187, 190, 191, 199, 217, 276, 524 
dynamicFeature.xsd  278, 374, 438, 601 
dynamicProperties  203, 376 


E 


edge  5, 173, 174, 176, 178, 191, 192, 193, 194, 468, 469, 472, 474 
Edge  173, 174, 176, 470, 472 
edgeOf  37 
EdgeType  173, 472 
element  xxi, 3, 5, 6, 7, 13, 14, 15, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 


49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 
89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 99, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, 120, 121, 123, 125, 126, 
127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 135, 137, 138, 139, 140, 141, 142, 143, 144, 145, 146, 150, 151, 152, 153, 154, 155, 156, 157, 158, 159, 
160, 161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 166, 167, 168, 169, 170, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 176, 177, 178, 179, 180, 181, 182, 183, 184, 185, 186, 187, 189, 
190, 191, 192, 193, 194, 195, 196, 197, 198, 199, 200, 201, 203, 204, 205, 206, 207, 208, 209, 210, 212, 213, 214, 215, 216, 224, 225, 226, 227, 
228, 229, 230, 231, 232, 233, 234, 235, 236, 237, 239, 240, 241, 242, 244, 245, 246, 247, 248, 249, 250, 251, 252, 254, 255, 258, 259, 260, 261, 
262, 263, 264, 267, 268, 269, 270, 271, 272, 273, 274, 275, 276, 278, 281, 282, 283, 284, 285, 286, 287, 288, 289, 290, 291, 292, 293, 294, 295, 
301, 492, 495, 496, 497, 498, 499, 500, 501, 502, 503, 504, 507, 508, 509, 510, 511, 512, 513, 514, 516, 517, 519, 520, 522, 523, 524, 526, 527, 
528, 529, 532, 536, 539, 540, 541, 552, 553, 562, 568, 569, 570, 573, 574, 575, 576, 577, 578, 579, 581, 582, 583, 586, 587, 589, 591, 593, 594, 
600, 602, 603, 604, 605, 606 


Ellipsoid  114, 128, 129, 139, 140, 141, 327, 338, 339, 359, 361, 362 
EllipsoidalCS  114, 128, 129, 327, 338, 339 
ellipsoidalCSRef  128 
EllipsoidalCSRefType  114, 128, 327, 338 
EllipsoidalCSType  128, 338 
EllipsoidBaseType  140, 362 
ellipsoidID  140, 362 
ellipsoidName  140, 361 
ellipsoidRef  141 
EllipsoidRefType  139, 141, 359, 362 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


10  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


EllipsoidType  140, 361 
encapsulate  206, 288, 289, 290, 536 
Engineering  9, 100, 101, 109, 110, 122, 123, 134, 136 
EngineeringCRS  118, 119, 332 
engineeringCRSRef  119 
EngineeringCRSRefType  119, 332 
EngineeringCRSType  118, 332 
EngineeringDatum  119, 143, 144, 332, 356 
engineeringDatumRef  143 
EngineeringDatumRefType  119, 143, 332, 356 
EngineeringDatumType  143, 356 
Envelope  17, 33, 41, 47, 105, 106, 283, 377, 378, 398, 455, 502 
EnvelopeType  33, 47, 105, 106, 283, 378, 398, 455 
EnvelopeWithTimePeriod  33, 377 
EnvelopeWithTimePeriodType  33, 377 
EPSG  9, 25, 34, 233, 234, 247, 258, 260, 261, 265, 532 
error  98, 108, 111, 147, 151, 155, 158, 168, 169, 278, 280, 281, 309, 315, 316, 325, 352, 586 
extentOf  37, 273 
ExtentType  105, 454 
exterior  5, 7, 52, 73, 74, 75, 76, 86, 261, 262, 401, 402, 425, 427, 428, 436, 496, 501, 509, 553, 607 


F 


face  6, 173, 174, 175, 176, 178, 472, 475 
Face  174, 175, 177, 471, 472, 473 
FaceType  174, 472 
factor  216, 223 
feature  xxi, 1, 5, 6, 7, 8, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 21, 22, 24, 31, 32, 33, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 44, 99, 100, 109, 114, 122, 126, 131, 138, 171, 177, 178, 


179, 182, 191, 192, 193, 195, 202, 203, 204, 205, 206, 211, 212, 236, 238, 243, 244, 247, 248, 249, 266, 267, 268, 269, 270, 271, 272, 273, 275, 
277, 278, 280, 284, 286, 287, 288, 292, 293, 294, 301, 327, 336, 340, 343, 344, 355, 365, 366, 367, 368, 369, 375, 376, 377, 378, 379, 439, 449, 
466, 469, 474, 475, 477, 529, 530, 536, 537, 538, 539, 540, 541, 543, 560, 563, 564, 565, 566, 573, 576, 587, 589, 591, 592, 600, 601 


Feature  25, 28, 32, 39, 40, 41, 203, 239, 268, 270, 286, 287, 292, 301, 570, 573, 574, 581, 582, 587, 589, 593, 595 
feature collection  xxi, 11, 31, 39, 40, 41, 182, 204, 205, 211, 243, 266, 267, 268, 280, 286, 287, 293, 376, 378, 379, 477, 536, 560, 573 
feature relationship  6, 466 
feature.xsd  14, 31, 36, 277, 278, 284, 286, 343, 375, 376, 449, 560, 600, 601 
FeatureArrayPropertyType  35, 378 
FeatureCollection  39, 40, 41, 203, 204, 283, 286, 287, 376, 378, 573, 589, 591, 607 
FeatureCollectionType  40, 203, 376, 378 
featureMember  32, 35, 40, 204, 378, 573, 591, 607 
featureMember XE "featureMember" s  35, 204 
featureMembers  32, 35, 40, 378, 607 
featureProperty  35, 600, 606, 607 
FeaturePropertyType  35, 239, 378, 449 
featureStyle  268, 269, 364, 541 
FeatureStyle  269, 270, 273, 274, 275, 276, 364, 365, 536, 539, 541 
FeatureStylePropertyType  269, 364 
FeatureStyleType  269, 365 
File  250, 252, 253, 262, 264, 345, 346 
FileType  252, 346 
FileValueModelType  252, 346 
formula  71, 163, 212, 216, 221, 320, 419, 479, 480, 481 
FormulaType  216, 481 
from  488 
function  xxi, 5, 6, 7, 22, 55, 56, 64, 71, 77, 78, 81, 147, 243, 248, 254, 256, 259, 260, 261, 262, 269, 274, 280, 299, 344, 345, 408, 409, 418, 421, 431, 


540, 543 


G 


generalConversionRef  154, 158, 314 
GeneralConversionRefType  112, 154, 158, 313, 314, 330 
generalDerivedCRSRef  112, 117, 118, 330, 331 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 11 
 


 


GeneralDerivedCRSRefType  112, 117, 118, 330, 331, 332 
generalTransformationRef  155, 159, 316 
GeneralTransformationRefType  155, 159, 315, 316 
GenericMetaData  31, 441 
GenericMetaDataType  31, 441 
Geocentric  100, 108, 110, 122, 124, 134 
GeocentricCRS  115, 116, 328, 329 
geocentricCRSRef  116 
GeocentricCRSRefType  116, 329 
GeocentricCRSType  115, 328 
Geodesic  71, 72, 420, 507 
GeodesicString  71, 72, 420, 507 
GeodesicStringType  71, 72, 420 
GeodesicType  72, 420 
GeodeticDatum  114, 139, 327, 359, 360 
geodeticDatumRef  139 
GeodeticDatumRefType  114, 139, 327, 359 
GeodeticDatumType  139, 359 
Geographic  i, 3, xx, xxi, 1, 2, 3, 9, 99, 100, 101, 105, 109, 110, 122, 124, 301, 445, 454, 478, 532, 614 
GeographicCRS  114, 326, 327, 606 
geographicCRSRef  114 
GeographicCRSRefType  114, 327 
GeographicCRSType  114, 326 
geometric aggregate  xxii, 42, 86, 90, 91, 92, 93, 95, 97, 380, 381, 382, 383, 384, 385, 554 
geometric complex  xxii, 86, 87, 89, 90, 184, 345, 406, 457 
geometric object  4, 6, 45, 47, 60, 62, 78, 87, 392, 413, 414, 523, 540 
geometric property  11, 35, 37, 43, 390 
geometric set  6 
GeometricAggregate  87, 90, 91, 92, 94, 95, 96 
GeometricComplex  41, 87, 89, 406, 512, 579, 596 
GeometricComplexPropertyType  89, 512, 579 
GeometricComplexType  87, 89, 406, 579, 596 
geometricPositionGroup  45, 72, 83, 398, 420, 435, 579, 583 
GeometricPositionGroup  45, 579, 583 
geometricPositionListGroup  45, 77, 429, 579 
GeometricPositionListGroup  45, 579 
GeometricPrimitive  42, 47, 48, 49, 51, 85, 87 
GeometricPrimitivePropertyType  48, 89, 406 
Geometry  33, 41, 42, 43, 44, 47, 53, 89, 90, 245, 288, 301, 579, 588, 595 
geometry model  41, 42, 54, 86, 87 
geometryAggregates.xsd  86, 344, 380, 404, 601 
GeometryArrayPropertyType  44, 91, 288, 387 
geometryBasic0d1d.xsd  41, 228, 229, 373, 389, 399, 444, 481, 601 
geometryBasic2d.xsd  31, 41, 104, 277, 377, 399, 407, 451, 601 
geometryComplexes.xsd  86, 171, 287, 404, 470, 601 
geometryMember  90, 91, 381 
geometryMembers  90, 91, 381 
geometryPrimitives.xsd  54, 380, 406, 407, 601 
geometryProperty  271 
GeometryPropertyType  43, 44, 91, 288, 387, 579 
geometryStyle  269, 270, 365, 541 
GeometryStyle  270, 271, 273, 275, 366, 540, 541 
GeometryStylePropertyType  271, 366 
GeometryStyleType  271, 366 
GIS  i, ii, xx, 9 
global  24, 26, 38, 39, 99, 172, 173, 174, 175, 267, 280, 281, 285, 287, 292, 294, 295, 344, 409, 410, 411, 412, 414, 415, 416, 418, 420, 422, 424, 443, 


444, 480, 487, 491, 569, 570, 573, 587, 589, 591, 593, 594, 595, 600 
gml  i, 3, i, xxi, 1, 9 
gml.xsd  278, 284, 285, 438, 601, 606 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


12  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


gmlBase.xsd  13, 14, 23, 25, 229, 277, 371, 390, 438, 455, 478, 548, 601 
grammar  xxi, 11, 270, 273, 274, 365, 370, 536, 543 
graph  184, 192, 193, 195, 199, 202, 243, 269, 274, 275, 276, 277, 365, 368, 369, 466 
graphStyle  268, 276, 364, 541 
GraphStyle  269, 276, 368, 541 
GraphStylePropertyType  276, 368 
GraphStyleType  276, 368 
GraphTypeType  276, 369 
greenwichLongitude  142, 143, 360 
grid  6, 7, 14, 79, 101, 136, 144, 149, 242, 244, 245, 246, 255, 263, 264, 276, 345, 347, 357, 369, 429, 430, 444, 445, 446, 545 
Grid  244, 245, 246, 254, 255, 256, 263, 264, 265, 346, 347, 350, 444, 445 
GridCoverage  263, 350 
GridCoverageType  263, 350 
GriddedSurface  78, 79, 80 
gridDomain  263, 264, 350 
GridDomainType  350 
GridEnvelopeType  245, 445 
GridFunction  254, 255, 346, 347 
GridFunctionType  255, 347 
GridLengthType  224 
GridLimitsType  245, 444 
grids.xsd  47, 244, 263, 264, 265, 344, 444, 601 
GridType  244, 246, 444, 445 
groupID  166, 167, 323 
groupName  166, 167, 323 


H 


hierarchy  12, 13, 183, 201, 207, 228, 281, 439, 460, 463, 495, 516, 522, 527, 570 
history  189, 191, 203, 204, 205, 206, 375, 376, 466 
HistoryPropertyType  206, 375, 376 
href  7, 15, 24, 25, 26, 27, 34, 187, 196, 197, 201, 210, 211, 217, 218, 234, 238, 240, 241, 242, 249, 254, 275, 438, 488, 536, 601, 606 
HTTP  9 


I 


id  3, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 34, 39, 42, 106, 125, 127, 137, 140, 142, 146, 150, 153, 154, 162, 165, 167, 172, 186, 187, 196, 197, 201, 208, 209, 
210, 211, 213, 217, 218, 219, 220, 221, 222, 223, 224, 244, 247, 265, 283, 301, 308, 313, 315, 319, 322, 323, 335, 337, 354, 358, 360, 361, 371, 
372, 391, 439, 441, 451, 495, 516, 522, 527, 529, 536, 540, 587, 590, 592 


IdentifierType  104, 107, 125, 128, 138, 140, 143, 151, 163, 166, 167, 309, 320, 322, 324, 336, 338, 355, 361, 362, 452 
IETF  2, 9 
Image  101, 109, 119, 122, 123, 136, 333 
ImageCRS  119, 120, 332, 333 
imageCRSRef  120 
ImageCRSRefType  120, 333 
ImageCRSType  119, 332 
ImageDatum  120, 144, 333, 356, 357 
imageDatumRef  144 
ImageDatumRefType  120, 144, 333, 357 
ImageDatumType  144, 356 
includesCRS  113, 326 
includesElement  170, 353 
includesParameter  166, 167, 323 
includesValue  161, 162, 318 
IncrementOrder  255, 347 
IndexMap  347 
IndexMapType  347 
indirectEntry  208, 209, 210, 211, 372 
IndirectEntryType  209, 372 
informative  278, 490, 491, 562, 581, 600 
inheritance  87, 266, 267, 498, 512, 530, 565 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 13 
 


 


innerBoundaryIs  53 
integer  18, 19, 20, 161, 230, 235, 245, 255, 293, 572 
integerList  19, 161, 245, 255, 318, 347, 445 
integerOrNull  18, 19, 20, 230, 235, 305, 483, 485, 572 
integerOrNullList  19, 230, 235, 483, 485, 572 
integerValue  160, 161, 317 
integerValueList  160, 161, 317 
interior  4, 6, 7, 52, 53, 56, 73, 74, 76, 83, 86, 99, 176, 401, 402, 409, 425, 427, 428, 434, 436, 437, 472, 496, 501, 509, 553, 607 
interoperability  280, 288, 289, 290, 291 
inverseFlattening  141, 362 
isolated  172, 176, 470 
IsolatedPropertyType  176, 470 
isSphere  141, 142, 362 


K 


KnotPropertyType  65, 66, 67, 423, 424 
KnotType  65, 66, 67, 422, 424, 425, 506 
KnotTypesType  65, 67, 424, 425 


L 


label  488, 489 
labelStyle  270, 271, 272, 365, 366, 367, 540, 542 
LabelStyle  270, 272, 273, 274, 367, 368, 540, 541, 542 
LabelStylePropertyType  272, 367 
LabelStyleType  273, 368 
LabelType  273, 368 
lang  217, 307, 324, 334, 343, 351, 354, 374, 375, 376, 444, 445, 451, 455, 456, 457, 459, 460, 461, 462, 463, 464, 465, 466, 467, 468, 469, 478 
legacy system  288, 289, 290 
LengthType  62, 69, 83, 141, 224, 362, 363, 415, 416, 434, 492, 571, 573, 597 
lexical  22, 188, 189, 213, 307, 460, 461, 524, 525, 526 
line string  6, 50, 51, 56, 64, 84, 93, 94, 254, 386, 389, 395, 399, 408, 409, 421, 434, 553 
LinearCS  131, 340, 341 
linearCSRef  131 
LinearCSRefType  131, 340 
LinearCSType  131, 340 
LinearRing  53, 54, 75, 261, 262, 402, 403, 553, 607 
LinearRingPropertyType  54 
LinearRingType  53, 402 
LineString  36, 45, 50, 51, 56, 57, 83, 84, 93, 260, 389, 395, 399, 409, 434, 435, 493, 504, 552, 588, 607 
lineStringMember  93, 94, 386 
lineStringProperty  51, 600, 606 
LineStringPropertyType  51, 93, 389, 399 
LineStringSegment  50, 56, 57, 83, 84, 409, 434, 435, 504 
LineStringSegmentArrayPropertyType  83, 84, 434 
LineStringSegmentType  56, 57, 409 
LineStringType  50, 395, 588 
LineTypeType  276, 369 
list types  19, 20, 21, 43, 44, 161, 228, 230, 235, 245, 251, 255, 292, 293, 572 
local  41, 69, 70, 78, 84, 99, 100, 109, 118, 123, 136, 144, 195, 199, 207, 251, 280, 285, 307, 332, 356, 417, 434, 466, 570, 576, 594, 601, 602 
location  xxi, 8, 11, 16, 23, 25, 26, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 37, 39, 40, 41, 42, 55, 70, 86, 104, 111, 124, 137, 139, 149, 150, 169, 182, 186, 191, 195, 202, 


204, 205, 206, 207, 212, 224, 228, 236, 239, 240, 241, 242, 243, 244, 247, 256, 268, 280, 283, 375, 377, 379, 380, 533 
LocationKeyword  33, 533, 580 
LocationKeyWord  34, 379 
LocationPropertyType  33, 34, 35, 379, 380 
LocationString  33, 34, 241, 379, 533, 580 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


14  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


M 


MappingRule  254, 346 
maximalComplex  179, 476 
maximumOccurs  166, 167, 323 
measurand  7 
measure  xxi, 6, 7, 12, 14, 19, 21, 43, 98, 101, 108, 110, 121, 122, 123, 126, 129, 147, 160, 161, 169, 170, 207, 211, 212, 213, 214, 215, 216, 217, 222, 


224, 225, 231, 232, 275, 284, 293, 295, 296, 317, 318, 336, 339, 352, 353, 392, 445, 446, 447, 478, 479, 480, 481, 482, 483, 492 
Measure  19, 62, 69, 83, 141, 160, 170, 205, 211, 224, 225, 228, 231, 237, 242, 288, 292, 296, 492, 571, 572, 573, 582, 597 
measureDescription  169, 352 
MeasureListType  21, 161, 211, 228, 317 
MeasureOrNullListType  21, 211, 231, 235, 251, 292, 293, 483, 484 
measures.xsd  212, 238, 275, 293, 296, 363, 390, 445, 601 
MeasureType  19, 160, 170, 205, 211, 224, 225, 228, 231, 242, 292, 296, 317, 352, 375, 446, 447, 450, 483, 492, 572, 597 
member  i, xx, 16, 17, 24, 27, 29, 39, 40, 76, 87, 88, 89, 167, 184, 190, 192, 193, 199, 200, 201, 202, 231, 233, 234, 236, 240, 250, 284, 285, 440, 529, 


607 
members  6, 20, 29, 40, 41, 87, 91, 92, 93, 95, 97, 167, 180, 182, 199, 204, 205, 208, 211, 228, 232, 234, 245, 254, 258, 259, 260, 261, 262, 280, 286, 


293, 440, 570, 604, 607 
meridianID  142, 143, 360 
meridianName  142, 360 
Metadata  24, 28, 30, 31, 39, 103, 104, 106, 125, 127, 137, 140, 142, 146, 150, 153, 154, 162, 165, 166, 183, 207, 208, 568, 592, 607 
metaDataProperty  24, 28, 30, 39, 103, 104, 106, 125, 127, 137, 140, 142, 146, 150, 153, 154, 162, 165, 166, 183, 207, 208, 308, 313, 315, 319, 322, 


323, 335, 337, 354, 358, 360, 361, 371, 439, 451, 568, 592, 607 
MetaDataPropertyType  28, 30, 442 
method  4, 16, 24, 25, 55, 74, 75, 147, 149, 150, 153, 154, 155, 157, 158, 159, 160, 161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 167, 188, 191, 205, 225, 242, 243, 250, 


252, 291, 308, 312, 313, 314, 315, 316, 317, 318, 319, 320, 321, 322, 323, 407, 427, 428, 479, 532, 537, 540, 543, 601, 606, 609 
methodFormula  162, 163, 320 
methodID  162, 163, 319 
methodName  162, 163, 319 
minimumOccurs  164, 165, 166, 321, 322, 323 
minutes  189, 191, 225, 226, 227, 448 
model driven  12 
modelling  xxi, 1, 14, 149, 171, 532 
modifiedCoordinate  156, 157, 311 
modularisation  277 
MovingObjectStatus  205, 206, 375, 376 
MovingObjectStatusType  205, 375 
multiCenterLineOf  37 
multiCenterOf  37 
multiCoverage  37 
MultiCurve  36, 37, 92, 93, 94, 259, 260, 348, 349, 383, 388, 511, 580, 596 
MultiCurveCoverage  348 
MultiCurveCoverageType  348 
multiCurveDomain  259, 349 
MultiCurveDomainType  349 
multiCurveProperty  36, 93, 383 
MultiCurvePropertyType  36, 37, 93, 94, 383, 388, 580 
MultiCurveType  92, 93, 94, 383, 580, 596 
multiEdgeOf  37 
multiExtentOf  37 
MultiGeometry  36, 41, 90, 91, 380, 381, 554, 579, 580, 596 
multiGeometryProperty  36, 91, 381, 382 
MultiGeometryPropertyType  36, 91, 381, 579, 580 
MultiGeometryType  90, 380, 579, 580, 596 
MultiLineString  94, 386 
MultiLineStringPropertyType  94 
MultiLineStringType  94, 386 
multiLocation  37 
MultiPoint  36, 37, 91, 92, 257, 258, 259, 263, 348, 381, 382, 388, 389, 511, 580, 596 
MultiPointCoverage  348 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 15 
 


 


MultiPointCoverageType  348 
multiPointDomain  258, 348 
MultiPointDomainType  348 
multiPointProperty  36, 92 
MultiPointPropertyType  36, 37, 92, 382, 388, 389, 580 
MultiPointType  91, 92, 381, 580, 596 
MultiPolygon  95, 96, 386, 387 
MultiPolygonPropertyType  96 
MultiPolygonType  95, 96, 386 
multiPosition  37 
MultiSolid  36, 96, 97, 262, 350, 385, 512, 580, 596 
MultiSolidCoverage  350 
MultiSolidCoverageType  350 
multiSolidDomain  262, 350 
MultiSolidDomainType  350 
multiSolidProperty  36, 97, 385 
MultiSolidPropertyType  36, 97, 385, 580 
MultiSolidType  96, 385, 580, 596 
MultiSurface  36, 37, 94, 95, 96, 260, 261, 262, 349, 384, 388, 511, 580, 596 
MultiSurfaceCoverage  349 
MultiSurfaceCoverageType  349 
multiSurfaceDomain  261, 349 
MultiSurfaceDomainType  349 
multiSurfaceProperty  36, 95, 384, 607 
MultiSurfacePropertyType  36, 37, 95, 96, 384, 388, 580 
MultiSurfaceType  94, 96, 384, 580, 596 


N 


name  ii, xxi, 4, 5, 6, 8, 11, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 
48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 
88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, 120, 121, 123, 124, 125, 126, 
127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 137, 138, 139, 140, 141, 142, 143, 144, 145, 146, 149, 150, 151, 152, 153, 154, 155, 156, 157, 158, 159, 
160, 161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 166, 167, 169, 170, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 176, 177, 178, 179, 180, 181, 182, 183, 184, 185, 186, 187, 188, 189, 
190, 191, 192, 193, 194, 195, 196, 197, 198, 199, 200, 201, 202, 203, 204, 205, 206, 207, 208, 209, 210, 211, 212, 213, 214, 215, 216, 217, 218, 
219, 220, 221, 222, 223, 224, 225, 226, 227, 228, 229, 230, 231, 232, 233, 234, 235, 236, 237, 239, 240, 241, 242, 244, 245, 246, 247, 248, 249, 
250, 251, 252, 254, 255, 258, 259, 260, 262, 263, 264, 267, 268, 269, 270, 271, 272, 273, 274, 275, 276, 281, 282, 283, 287, 288, 290, 308, 319, 
322, 323, 335, 337, 354, 360, 361, 371, 439, 451, 453, 492, 493, 495, 502, 504, 505, 506, 509, 512, 513, 516, 519, 520, 522, 523, 525, 526, 527, 
528, 529, 530, 538, 539, 540, 544, 547, 549, 563, 564, 566, 570, 571, 573, 574, 575, 576, 577, 578, 581, 582, 583, 587, 589, 590, 591, 593, 595, 
598, 599, 600, 601, 602, 603, 604, 605, 606, 607, 608, 609, 610, 611, 612, 613 


Name  19, 20 
NameList  19, 20, 306 
nameOrNull  18, 20, 572 
NameOrNull  18, 19, 20, 304, 306, 572 
NameOrNull XE "NameOrNull" List  20, 572 
NameOrNullList  19, 20, 306 
NCName  19, 43 
NCNameList  19, 43, 392 
nested  69, 76, 77, 88, 89, 149, 207, 404, 405, 408, 429, 463, 587 
node  7, 172, 173, 176, 177, 191, 192, 193, 194, 468, 471, 472, 474, 539 
Node  172, 173, 176, 470, 471 
NodeType  172, 471 
normative  1, 3, 11, 13, 15, 286, 297, 301, 303, 442, 562, 585, 593 
Null  16, 17, 18, 33, 34, 229, 232, 233, 234, 236, 304, 305, 377, 379, 482, 572 
NullEnumeration  16, 18, 304, 305 
NullType  16, 17, 21, 304, 572 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


16  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


O 


object  4, 6, 7, 8, 13, 15, 21, 22, 23, 24, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 36, 37, 38, 44, 45, 47, 60, 62, 71, 72, 76, 78, 86, 104, 105, 106, 110, 123, 124, 182, 183, 
184, 186, 187, 191, 192, 194, 196, 204, 205, 206, 208, 209, 211, 239, 240, 244, 248, 249, 267, 268, 269, 270, 274, 285, 286, 291, 294, 299, 301, 
303, 344, 372, 373, 376, 396, 419, 420, 428, 436, 438, 439, 441, 443, 449, 450, 453, 454, 455, 491, 495, 496, 497, 498, 499, 500, 501, 502, 503, 
504, 505, 506, 507, 508, 509, 510, 511, 512, 513, 514, 516, 517, 519, 520, 521, 522, 523, 526, 527, 528, 529, 530, 532, 533, 539, 540, 544, 545, 
548, 552, 553, 562, 564, 565, 566, 568, 574, 576, 580, 587, 588, 589, 590, 591, 592, 593, 594, 595, 597, 598, 599 


ObliqueCartesianCS  120, 134, 333, 343 
obliqueCartesianCSRef  134 
ObliqueCartesianCSRefType  120, 134, 333, 343 
ObliqueCartesianCSType  134, 343 
observable  7, 295 
observation  xxi, 7, 14, 99, 168, 213, 238, 239, 240, 241, 278, 293, 294, 296, 438, 449, 450, 480, 560, 601 
Observation  239, 240, 241, 283, 294, 450 
observation.xsd  14, 278, 294, 438, 449, 601 
ObservationType  239, 241, 294, 450 
OffsetCurve  69, 416, 507 
OffsetCurveType  69, 416 
OGC  i, ii, xx, xxi, 1, 2, 9, 11, 13, 31, 35, 39, 98, 103, 109, 111, 124, 136, 150, 168, 171, 242, 249, 280, 285, 301, 307, 309, 325, 332, 335, 343, 351, 


354, 356, 363, 374, 377, 380, 390, 399, 404, 407, 438, 444, 445, 451, 455, 461, 466, 478, 481, 487, 531, 569 
operation  101, 102, 103, 110, 147, 148, 149, 150, 151, 152, 153, 154, 155, 156, 157, 158, 159, 160, 161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 166, 167, 168, 191, 291, 


298, 299, 307, 308, 309, 310, 311, 312, 313, 314, 315, 316, 317, 318, 319, 320, 321, 322, 323, 324, 491, 493, 496, 514, 523, 532, 537, 540, 569 
OperationMethod  158, 162, 164, 314, 319, 320 
OperationMethodBaseType  162, 319 
operationMethodRef  164 
OperationMethodRefType  158, 164, 314, 320 
OperationMethodType  162, 319 
OperationParameter  161, 162, 165, 166, 167, 168, 318, 319, 321, 322, 323, 324 
OperationParameterBaseType  165, 322 
OperationParameterGroup  162, 166, 168, 319, 323, 324 
OperationParameterGroupBaseType  166, 323 
operationParameterGroupRef  167 
OperationParameterGroupRefType  162, 319 
OperationParameterGroupType  166, 323 
operationParameterRef  166 
OperationParameterRefType  161, 166, 167, 318, 322, 324 
OperationParameterType  165, 321 
operationRef  153, 154, 155, 313, 315 
OperationRefType  153, 154, 155, 157, 311, 312, 313, 315 
operationVersion  150, 151, 154, 309, 315 
OrientableCurve  36, 68, 69, 407, 493, 498, 588 
OrientableCurveType  68, 407, 588 
OrientableSurface  36, 76, 77, 426, 493, 498, 588 
OrientableSurfaceType  76, 77, 426, 588 
origin  146, 197, 246, 247, 265, 358 
outerBoundaryIs  52 


P 


parameter  5, 56, 66, 69, 70, 71, 78, 79, 123, 135, 137, 141, 147, 149, 150, 153, 154, 155, 158, 159, 160, 161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 166, 167, 168, 169, 
296, 308, 312, 313, 314, 315, 316, 317, 318, 319, 320, 321, 322, 323, 324, 352, 355, 362, 408, 409, 417, 418, 419, 422, 429, 430, 532, 600, 606 


parameterID  165, 166, 322 
parameterName  165, 322 
parameterValue  159, 161 
parameterValueGroup  161 
ParameterValueGroupType  161, 318 
ParameterValueType  158, 159, 314, 316 
ParametricCurveSurface  77, 78 
PassThroughOperation  156, 157, 311, 312 
passThroughOperationRef  157 
PassThroughOperationRefType  157, 312 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 17 
 


 


PassThroughOperationType  156, 311 
patches  73, 74, 75, 77, 81, 82, 83, 425, 432, 433, 496, 500 
pattern  18, 23, 24, 25, 26, 30, 35, 39, 40, 45, 104, 173, 174, 175, 176, 177, 180, 181, 191, 200, 209, 211, 224, 232, 233, 234, 236, 240, 285, 286, 287, 


288, 289, 290, 303, 378, 381, 382, 383, 384, 385, 389, 390, 393, 394, 396, 397, 400, 405, 407, 425, 426, 435, 436, 437, 438, 441, 442, 453, 460, 
463, 470, 471, 472, 473, 476, 477, 478, 483, 484, 511, 525, 526, 569, 573, 574, 575, 576, 587, 589, 590, 591, 594, 598 


pixelInCell  144, 356 
PixelInCellType  144, 356 
point  4, 5, 7, 11, 14, 26, 44, 45, 46, 48, 49, 50, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 68, 69, 71, 72, 80, 81, 87, 88, 92, 98, 99, 109, 121, 122, 


123, 130, 131, 133, 135, 138, 143, 148, 151, 168, 172, 173, 177, 185, 190, 193, 204, 218, 237, 242, 243, 250, 255, 257, 263, 264, 309, 340, 342, 
347, 348, 355, 356, 382, 391, 393, 395, 402, 404, 407, 408, 409, 410, 411, 412, 413, 414, 415, 417, 419, 420, 421, 423, 424, 430, 432, 459, 474, 
484, 485, 511, 531 


Point  25, 26, 34, 36, 37, 48, 49, 77, 79, 87, 92, 206, 233, 234, 246, 247, 258, 259, 265, 288, 379, 388, 393, 394, 430, 445, 471, 497, 502, 514, 579, 588, 
595 


pointArrayProperty  36, 49 
PointArrayPropertyType  36, 49, 92, 388, 394 
PointGrid  77, 79, 430, 509 
pointMember  91, 92, 258, 259, 382 
pointMembers  91, 92, 382 
pointProperty  36, 45, 48, 49, 50, 53, 54, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 72, 172, 393, 396, 397, 402, 410, 411, 412, 413, 414, 415, 


421, 423, 424, 471, 502, 517 
PointPropertyType  36, 37, 48, 49, 50, 54, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 63, 64, 66, 68, 72, 92, 246, 379, 388, 393, 445, 471, 579 
pointRep  57, 58, 60, 61, 62, 64, 65, 67, 396, 402, 410, 411, 412, 413, 414, 415, 421, 423, 424 
PointType  48, 288, 393, 579, 588, 595 
PolarCS  132, 133, 342 
polarCSRef  133 
PolarCSRefType  133, 342 
PolarCSType  132, 342 
polygon  7, 11, 52, 54, 74, 75, 81, 82, 96, 106, 242, 274, 389, 401, 403, 427, 428, 432, 433, 455 
Polygon  36, 37, 52, 54, 74, 82, 96, 106, 261, 262, 389, 401, 403, 427, 432, 433, 455, 493, 509, 553, 588 
polygonMember  95, 387 
PolygonPatch  52, 74, 82, 427, 432, 433, 509 
PolygonPatchArrayPropertyType  82, 432 
polygonPatches  81, 82, 432 
PolygonPatchType  74, 427 
polygonProperty  54, 600, 606 
PolygonPropertyType  54, 96, 389, 403 
PolygonType  52, 106, 401, 455, 588 
PolyhedralSurface  81, 432, 510 
PolyhedralSurfaceType  81, 432 
pos  25, 26, 34, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 50, 51, 53, 54, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 72, 83, 205, 206, 233, 234, 247, 258, 259, 260, 261, 


262, 265, 393, 396, 397, 398, 402, 403, 410, 411, 412, 413, 414, 415, 420, 421, 423, 424, 435, 497, 502 
position  4, 5, 7, 25, 26, 32, 37, 38, 43, 44, 45, 47, 48, 57, 58, 61, 63, 65, 66, 68, 70, 72, 75, 98, 99, 100, 101, 109, 113, 122, 123, 128, 129, 130, 133, 


138, 145, 151, 157, 168, 169, 182, 183, 184, 185, 186, 187, 188, 189, 191, 192, 193, 194, 196, 197, 198, 199, 200, 202, 204, 205, 231, 242, 246, 
248, 255, 497, 521, 523, 525, 526, 528 


posList  44, 45, 48, 50, 53, 54, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 72, 83, 260, 261, 262, 396, 397, 398, 403, 410, 411, 412, 413, 414, 415, 
420, 421, 423, 424, 435 


PrimeMeridian  139, 142, 143, 359, 360, 361 
PrimeMeridianBaseType  142, 360 
primeMeridianRef  143 
PrimeMeridianRefType  139, 143, 359, 361 
PrimeMeridianType  142, 360 
priorityLocation  34, 35 
PriorityLocationPropertyType  34, 380 
profile  xx, 22, 182, 280, 281, 282, 284, 490, 491, 492, 493, 495, 501, 511, 512, 513, 514, 516, 520, 521, 522, 523, 526, 527, 529, 541, 544, 545, 547, 


565, 571, 574, 575, 593, 597 
Projected  101, 109, 110, 122, 124, 531 
ProjectedCRS  116, 117, 330, 331 
projectedCRSRef  117 
ProjectedCRSRefType  117, 330 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


18  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


ProjectedCRSType  116, 330 
property  xxi, 1, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 43, 44, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 


53, 54, 56, 66, 68, 70, 74, 76, 77, 82, 83, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 107, 108, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, 
120, 121, 122, 126, 128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 139, 141, 143, 144, 145, 146, 152, 153, 154, 155, 156, 157, 158, 159, 164, 165, 166, 168, 
171, 173, 174, 175, 176, 177, 178, 179, 180, 181, 182, 183, 184, 186, 187, 189, 191, 192, 193, 194, 195, 196, 197, 198, 199, 200, 201, 202, 203, 
204, 205, 206, 207, 208, 209, 210, 211, 212, 213, 214, 215, 232, 234, 236, 239, 240, 241, 243, 244, 246, 247, 248, 249, 250, 251, 252, 254, 256, 
263, 266, 267, 268, 269, 270, 271, 272, 273, 274, 275, 276, 277, 280, 283, 284, 285, 286, 287, 288, 289, 290, 291, 294, 296, 301, 345, 363, 364, 
369, 370, 372, 375, 377, 378, 379, 381, 382, 383, 384, 385, 386, 387, 388, 389, 390, 391, 392, 393, 394, 395, 398, 399, 400, 401, 402, 403, 404, 
405, 406, 407, 409, 418, 422, 423, 424, 425, 426, 428, 429, 432, 433, 435, 436, 439, 441, 442, 443, 444, 449, 461, 463, 467, 468, 469, 478, 485, 
486, 491, 493, 495, 496, 497, 498, 499, 500, 501, 502, 503, 505, 506, 507, 509, 511, 512, 513, 514, 516, 517, 519, 520, 522, 523, 524, 525, 526, 
527, 528, 529, 530, 532, 533, 535, 536, 539, 540, 541, 542, 543, 544, 552, 553, 555, 560, 564, 565, 569, 570, 573, 574, 575, 576, 577, 578, 579, 
582, 583, 587, 589, 590, 591, 593, 594, 597, 598, 599 


Q 


QName  19 
QNameList  19 
quantity  xxi, 7, 212, 213, 214, 215, 216, 219, 220, 224, 225, 296, 446, 447, 479, 480, 492 
Quantity  231, 233, 234, 235, 236, 240, 250, 292, 293, 484, 486 
QuantityExtent  235, 484 
QuantityExtentType  235, 484 
QuantityList  231, 233, 235, 250, 292, 293 
QuantityPropertyType  236 
quantityType  213, 217, 218, 219, 220, 221, 222, 223, 479 
QueryGrammarEnumeration  270, 365 


R 


range  xxi, 5, 6, 7, 30, 104, 210, 212, 238, 242, 243, 244, 248, 250, 251, 252, 254, 258, 292, 344, 345, 347, 453, 484, 485, 545 
rangeParameters  250, 251, 252, 253, 256, 260, 262, 264, 265, 346 
RangeParametersType  250, 346 
rangeSet  247, 250, 256, 258, 259, 260, 261, 262, 263, 264, 265, 344, 348, 349, 350, 351 
RangeSetType  250, 345 
RDF  9, 21 
realization  6, 138, 355, 491, 514, 521 
realizationEpoch  137, 138, 355 
Rectangle  75, 428, 554 
RectangleType  75, 428 
rectified grid  7, 246, 264, 445 
RectifiedGrid  244, 246, 247, 264, 265, 351, 445 
RectifiedGridCoverage  264, 351 
RectifiedGridCoverageType  351 
rectifiedGridDomain  264, 265, 351 
RectifiedGridDomainType  351 
RectifiedGridType  246, 445 
reference  26, 192, 200, 210, 214, 578, 589, 590 
reference system  xxi, xxii, 4, 5, 6, 7, 12, 19, 33, 34, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 47, 50, 54, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 64, 66, 68, 70, 71, 72, 78, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 


102, 103, 105, 106, 107, 108, 109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, 120, 121, 122, 123, 125, 126, 127, 134, 135, 136, 137, 140, 
142, 143, 144, 146, 147, 148, 150, 151, 153, 155, 156, 158, 163, 165, 167, 168, 182, 185, 188, 195, 197, 199, 201, 207, 249, 277, 282, 291, 292, 
294, 295, 310, 325, 326, 327, 328, 329, 330, 331, 332, 333, 334, 354, 355, 391, 417, 418, 419, 420, 451, 452, 453, 454, 457, 460, 462, 463, 527, 
529, 531, 545, 564 


referenceSystem  107, 108, 234, 453, 484 
referenceSystemRef  107, 108, 453 
ReferenceSystemRefType  107, 108, 452, 453 
referenceSystems.xsd  97, 103, 124, 137, 307, 308, 325, 335, 354, 450, 451, 601 
ReferenceType  26, 192, 200, 210, 214, 373, 442, 463, 467, 479, 578, 589, 590 
RelatedTimeType  183, 184, 200, 456, 463 
relativeInternalPositionalAccuracy  169 
RelativeInternalPositionalAccuracyType  169, 352 
remarks  104, 106, 125, 127, 137, 140, 142, 150, 153, 154, 162, 165, 166, 308, 313, 315, 319, 322, 323, 335, 337, 354, 360, 361, 451, 453 
remoteSchema  25, 27, 268, 442, 443 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 19 
 


 


result  169, 170, 239, 240, 241, 242, 296, 352, 450 
resultOf  239, 240, 241, 242, 296, 450 
RFC  2, 9 
ring  53, 54, 75, 76, 174, 401, 402, 403, 427, 428, 429, 553 
Ring  4, 5, 6, 7, 52, 53, 56, 73, 74, 75, 76, 83, 86, 99, 176, 261, 262, 428, 429, 496, 501, 509, 514, 553, 607 
RingPropertyType  76 
RingType  75, 76, 428 
role  25, 488 
roughConversionToPreferredUnit  215, 216, 479 
rowIndex  170, 171, 353 


S 


ScaleType  141, 224, 363, 365, 492, 572, 597 
schema  1, 3, 8, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 35, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 46, 55, 56, 74, 86, 97, 98, 103, 


104, 108, 110, 111, 121, 124, 134, 136, 137, 147, 149, 150, 168, 169, 171, 182, 183, 185, 190, 191, 192, 195, 197, 201, 202, 203, 204, 205, 206, 
207, 208, 211, 212, 213, 216, 224, 225, 227, 228, 229, 230, 231, 232, 233, 236, 237, 238, 239, 240, 244, 245, 246, 247, 248, 249, 251, 266, 267, 
268, 269, 270, 271, 272, 275, 277, 278, 280, 281, 282, 283, 284, 285, 286, 287, 288, 289, 290, 291, 292, 293, 294, 295, 296, 297, 298, 299, 302, 
303, 307, 324, 325, 334, 335, 343, 351, 353, 354, 363, 371, 373, 374, 376, 377, 380, 389, 399, 404, 406, 407, 438, 442, 443, 444, 445, 446, 449, 
450, 451, 455, 457, 461, 463, 466, 469, 470, 478, 481, 482, 484, 487, 489, 490, 498, 529, 530, 532, 533, 535, 541, 543, 547, 548, 560, 562, 568, 
569, 570, 571, 581, 583, 585, 586, 587, 589, 590, 591, 592, 593, 594, 595, 598, 599, 600, 601, 602, 607, 608 


Schematron  3, 26, 234, 286, 389, 438, 442, 484, 568, 591, 594 
scope  105, 106, 137, 146, 150, 153, 154, 309, 313, 315, 355, 358, 452 
secondDefiningParameter  140, 141, 362 
SecondDefiningParameterType  141, 362 
seconds  189, 225, 226, 227, 448 
segments  6, 55, 56, 64, 68, 72, 84, 407, 499, 504, 552, 554 
semantic  3, 8, 39, 40, 210, 250, 283, 285, 287, 288, 294, 469, 487, 507 
semantic type  8, 39, 40, 287, 294 
semiMajorAxis  140, 141, 362 
semiMinorAxis  141, 362 
sequence  4, 8, 11, 24, 26, 28, 29, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 39, 40, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 64, 65, 66, 67, 


68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 79, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 102, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 110, 111, 112, 
113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, 120, 121, 123, 125, 126, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 137, 138, 139, 140, 141, 142, 143, 144, 145, 
146, 148, 149, 150, 152, 153, 154, 155, 156, 157, 158, 159, 160, 161, 162, 164, 165, 166, 167, 168, 169, 170, 172, 173, 174, 175, 177, 178, 179, 
180, 181, 182, 183, 184, 186, 187, 192, 193, 194, 196, 198, 199, 200, 201, 203, 204, 205, 206, 207, 208, 209, 212, 213, 214, 215, 216, 225, 232, 
236, 237, 239, 241, 242, 245, 246, 247, 248, 249, 250, 251, 252, 255, 258, 259, 261, 262, 263, 264, 267, 268, 269, 270, 271, 272, 273, 276, 288, 
289, 308, 309, 310, 311, 312, 313, 314, 315, 316, 317, 318, 319, 320, 321, 322, 323, 324, 325, 326, 327, 328, 329, 330, 331, 332, 333, 334, 335, 
336, 337, 338, 339, 340, 341, 342, 343, 344, 345, 346, 347, 348, 349, 350, 351, 352, 353, 354, 355, 356, 357, 358, 359, 360, 361, 362, 364, 365, 
366, 367, 368, 369, 370, 371, 372, 373, 374, 375, 376, 377, 378, 379, 381, 382, 383, 384, 385, 386, 387, 390, 391, 392, 393, 394, 395, 396, 397, 
398, 399, 400, 401, 402, 403, 404, 405, 406, 407, 408, 409, 410, 411, 412, 413, 414, 415, 416, 417, 418, 419, 420, 421, 422, 423, 424, 425, 426, 
427, 428, 429, 430, 432, 433, 434, 435, 436, 437, 439, 440, 441, 442, 444, 445, 447, 448, 450, 451, 452, 453, 454, 455, 456, 458, 462, 463, 464, 
465, 466, 467, 468, 469, 470, 471, 472, 473, 474, 475, 476, 477, 478, 479, 480, 481, 483, 485, 486, 487, 525, 545, 572, 573, 574, 575, 576, 577, 
578, 582, 583, 589, 590, 593, 598 


SequenceRuleNames  255, 347 
SequenceRuleType  255, 347 
serialization  298, 299 
set  ii, xxi, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 15, 16, 18, 19, 35, 36, 38, 39, 40, 41, 47, 64, 66, 74, 80, 81, 84, 87, 88, 98, 99, 100, 101, 107, 108, 110, 121, 123, 125, 


126, 127, 135, 136, 137, 138, 140, 142, 145, 149, 151, 158, 159, 162, 163, 165, 167, 168, 170, 172, 174, 175, 178, 179, 184, 191, 193, 197, 200, 
203, 206, 207, 210, 212, 215, 224, 234, 235, 236, 242, 243, 244, 245, 246, 248, 250, 251, 252, 257, 263, 265, 267, 269, 270, 272, 275, 276, 277, 
280, 286, 290, 294, 295, 297, 307, 309, 314, 316, 318, 320, 324, 336, 337, 344, 345, 347, 348, 353, 355, 357, 366, 371, 377, 381, 382, 383, 384, 
385, 386, 387, 390, 392, 394, 395, 397, 399, 400, 403, 404, 406, 421, 423, 424, 425, 427, 431, 434, 436, 440, 444, 471, 472, 473, 475, 486, 504, 
505, 508, 538, 539, 542, 543, 544, 562, 563, 569, 570, 575, 576, 585, 586, 592, 595, 598, 600 


show  25, 488 
SignType  17, 68, 76, 173, 174, 175, 176, 408, 426, 448, 471, 472, 473, 474, 572, 575 
simple feature  11 
simpleLink  25, 443 
SimpleNameType  104, 107, 125, 127, 138, 140, 142, 151, 163, 165, 167, 308, 319, 322, 323, 335, 337, 354, 360, 361, 451 
singleOperationRef  152, 153, 157, 312 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


20  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


SingleOperationRefType  152, 153, 156, 157, 310, 311, 312 
SMIL  3, 9, 266, 275, 585 
smil20  363, 366, 542, 585, 600, 607, 608 
smil20.xsd  363, 607 
smil20lang  585, 600, 607 
smil20-language.xsd  607 
SOAP  9, 252 
Solid  36, 85, 86, 89, 97, 388, 435, 436, 493, 499, 501, 519, 579, 580, 588, 595, 596 
solidArrayProperty  36, 85, 86 
SolidArrayPropertyType  36, 85, 97, 388, 436 
solidMember  89, 96, 97, 385, 405 
solidMembers  96, 97, 385 
solidProperty  36, 85, 175, 435, 517 
SolidPropertyType  36, 85, 97, 388, 435, 579 
SolidType  86, 436, 579, 588, 595 
sourceCRS  150, 151, 154, 309, 315 
sourceDimensions  163, 320 
spatial object  6, 8 
SpeedType  492, 572, 597 
Sphere  80, 431, 510 
SphereType  80, 431 
SphericalCS  116, 132, 329, 341, 342 
sphericalCSRef  132 
SphericalCSRefType  116, 132, 329, 341 
SphericalCSType  132, 341 
srsDimension  42, 43, 45, 47 
srsDmension  47 
srsID  106, 107, 452 
SRSInformationGroup  42, 43, 391 
srsName  25, 33, 34, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 105, 106, 107, 233, 234, 247, 258, 260, 261, 265, 451, 495, 502, 532, 545 
SRSReferenceGroup  42, 44, 45, 47, 245, 391, 396, 397, 398 
StandardObjectProperties  28, 39, 81, 82, 258, 259, 261, 262, 263, 264, 348, 349, 350, 351, 379, 432, 433, 439 
status  205, 375 
sterotype  17 
stringOrNull  18, 572 
stringOrRefType  27 
StringOrRefType  27, 28, 34, 104, 198, 199, 203, 205, 213, 236, 254, 347, 374, 375, 379, 443, 454, 464, 465, 480 
stringValue  160, 317 
Style  267, 268, 269, 364, 365, 538, 539, 541 
StyleType  268, 364 
StyleVariationType  365 
subComplex  179, 180, 476 
subject  240, 241, 242 
subtype  3, i, 42, 75, 79, 87, 107, 108, 111, 112, 127, 137, 325, 329, 337, 355, 427, 428, 430, 452, 459, 493, 531, 552, 553 
SuccessionType  195 
superComplex  179, 180, 476 
supertype  42, 192, 390, 391, 439, 440, 442, 456, 457, 470, 530, 565, 571, 572, 573, 574, 578 
Surface  36, 37, 51, 52, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 81, 82, 83, 86, 88, 95, 379, 388, 400, 425, 426, 427, 428, 432, 433, 436, 496, 498, 499, 500, 553, 574, 579, 


582, 588, 595 
surfaceArrayProperty  36, 52 
SurfaceArrayPropertyType  36, 52, 95, 388, 400 
SurfaceInterpolationType  74, 75, 427, 428 
surfaceMember  88, 94, 95, 96, 261, 262, 384, 405, 607 
surfaceMembers  94, 95, 384 
SurfacePatch  73, 74, 75, 77, 588 
SurfacePatchArrayPropertyType  73, 82, 426, 433 
surfaceProperty  36, 51, 52, 54, 174, 400, 473, 517, 607 
SurfacePropertyType  36, 37, 51, 52, 54, 76, 86, 95, 379, 388, 400, 425, 436, 574, 579, 582 
SurfaceType  73, 81, 82, 425, 432, 433, 579, 588, 595 
SVG  3, 9, 274, 275, 533, 539, 540, 542, 543 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 21 
 


 


symbol  271, 272, 274, 275, 366, 367, 540, 541, 542 
SymbolType  369 
SymbolTypeEnumeration  369 


T 


tag  5, 8, 563 
target  150, 151, 154, 163, 239, 240, 241, 309, 315, 320, 449, 450, 530, 578, 599 
targetCRS  150, 151, 154, 309, 315 
targetDimensions  163, 320 
TargetPropertyType  239, 449 
Temporal  2, 38, 100, 109, 111, 122, 136, 182, 183, 184, 185, 191, 192, 193, 195, 231, 284, 290, 325, 345, 457, 461, 466, 482, 521, 522, 523, 524, 525, 


526, 527, 529, 531, 545 
temporal reference system  xxii, 12, 106, 182, 185, 188, 195, 197, 199, 200, 207, 452, 457, 461, 462, 463, 464, 527 
temporal.xsd  104, 203, 228, 229, 290, 377, 451, 455, 466, 481, 601 
TemporalCRS  120, 121, 333, 334 
temporalCRSRef  121 
TemporalCRSRefType  121, 334 
TemporalCRSType  120, 333 
TemporalCS  120, 130, 334, 340 
temporalCSRef  130 
TemporalCSRefType  120, 130, 334, 340 
TemporalCSType  130, 340 
TemporalDatum  121, 146, 334, 358, 359 
TemporalDatumBaseType  146, 358 
temporalDatumRef  146 
TemporalDatumRefType  121, 146, 334, 359 
TemporalDatumType  146, 358 
temporalExtent  105, 106, 454 
temporalReferenceSystems.xsd  278, 438, 461 
temporalTopology.xsd  461, 466 
test  26, 181, 233, 234, 282, 297, 298, 299, 300, 301, 389, 390, 438, 476, 484, 542, 543, 601, 602, 603, 604, 605, 606, 607, 608, 609, 610, 611, 612 
TimeCalendar  38, 195, 197, 198, 199, 464, 465, 466, 528 
TimeCalendarEra  38, 195, 197, 198, 464, 465, 528 
TimeCalendarEraPropertyType  38, 198, 464 
TimeCalendarEraType  198, 464 
TimeCalendarPropertyType  38, 199, 466 
TimeCalendarType  197, 198, 464 
TimeClock  39, 195, 199, 465, 466, 528 
TimeClockPropertyType  39 
TimeClockType  199, 465 
TimeComplex  185, 193 
TimeCoordinateSystem  195, 196, 197, 462, 528 
TimeCoordinateSystemType  196, 462 
TimeEdge  38, 193, 194, 200, 468, 469, 527, 529, 580, 589, 596 
TimeEdgePropertyType  38, 193, 194, 468, 580 
TimeEdgeType  194, 200, 468, 580, 589, 596 
TimeGeometricPrimitive  185, 186 
TimeGeometricPrimitivePropertyType  38 
TimeIndeterminateValueType  188, 460 
TimeInstant  38, 185, 186, 187, 189, 194, 196, 197, 201, 206, 233, 240, 241, 242, 290, 458, 462, 468, 523, 528, 580, 588, 596 
TimeInstantPropertyType  38, 186, 187, 194, 196, 197, 290, 458, 462, 468, 580 
TimeInstantType  186, 458, 580, 588, 596 
timeInterval  38, 190, 191, 524 
TimeIntervalLengthType  38, 190, 196, 197, 459, 462, 528 
TimeLengthType  190, 459 
TimeNode  38, 193, 194, 200, 463, 468, 469, 526, 580, 589, 596 
TimeNodePropertyType  38, 194, 200, 463, 469, 580 
TimeNodeType  193, 468, 580, 589, 596 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


22  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


TimeObject  183, 185, 290 
TimeOrdinalEra  38, 195, 200, 201, 202, 463, 464, 529 
TimeOrdinalEraPropertyType  38, 200, 463 
TimeOrdinalEraType  200, 463 
TimeOrdinalReferenceSystem  195, 200, 201, 202, 462, 529 
TimeOrdinalReferenceSystemType  200, 462 
TimePeriod  38, 106, 186, 187, 194, 198, 200, 455, 458, 463, 465, 469, 523, 580, 589, 596 
TimePeriodPropertyType  38, 187, 194, 198, 200, 463, 465, 469, 580 
TimePeriodType  106, 186, 455, 458, 580, 589, 596 
timePosition  33, 38, 186, 187, 188, 189, 197, 201, 206, 233, 240, 241, 242, 378, 458, 523 
TimePositionType  186, 187, 188, 189, 196, 458, 460, 462, 525 
TimePositionUnion  188, 189, 460 
TimePrimitive  183, 185, 192 
TimePrimitivePropertyType  38, 184, 186, 187, 456, 461 
timeslice  204, 375 
TimeTopologyComplex  38, 193, 466, 467, 523, 526, 580, 589, 596 
TimeTopologyComplexPropertyType  38, 192, 580 
TimeTopologyComplexType  193, 466, 580, 589, 596 
TimeTopologyPrimitive  192 
TimeTopologyPrimitivePropertyType  38, 192, 193, 467 
TimeType  224, 492 
TimeUnitType  190, 459 
Tin  83, 434, 510 
TinType  83, 434 
title  25, 488, 489 
to  488 
TopoComplex  179, 180, 182, 289, 476, 477, 580, 596 
TopoComplexMemberType  180, 182, 289, 290, 476, 580 
topoComplexProperty  182 
TopoComplexType  179, 180, 476, 580, 596 
TopoCurve  178, 244, 474 
topoCurveProperty  178 
TopoCurvePropertyType  178, 474 
TopoCurveType  178, 474 
topological object  8, 18, 304 
topology  xxi, 8, 12, 14, 37, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 176, 177, 178, 179, 180, 181, 182, 184, 191, 192, 193, 244, 269, 270, 271, 272, 274, 275, 277, 


278, 289, 290, 294, 365, 367, 368, 375, 438, 457, 466, 467, 468, 469, 470, 471, 472, 473, 474, 475, 476, 477, 514, 519, 520, 526, 541, 555, 601 
topology.xsd  14, 278, 289, 290, 438, 470, 601 
topologyStyle  270, 271, 365, 542 
TopologyStyle  270, 271, 272, 367, 541, 542 
TopologyStylePropertyType  271, 367 
TopologyStyleType  272, 367 
TopoPoint  177, 244, 474 
topoPointProperty  177 
TopoPointPropertyType  177, 474 
TopoPointType  177, 474 
TopoPrimitiveArrayAssociationType  181, 477 
topoPrimitiveMember  180, 181, 476, 477 
topoPrimitiveMembers  180, 181, 476 
topoPrimitiveMemberType  181, 477 
TopoSolid  175, 177, 244, 471, 473, 474 
TopoSolidType  175, 473 
TopoSurface  178, 179, 244, 475 
topoSurfaceProperty  178 
TopoSurfacePropertyType  178, 179, 475 
TopoSurfaceType  178, 475 
TopoVolume  179, 289, 475 
topoVolumeProperty  179 
TopoVolumePropertyType  179, 289, 475 
TopoVolumeType  179, 475 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 23 
 


 


track  206, 606 
TrackType  206, 376 
transform  159, 273, 369, 370 
Transformation  158, 159, 315, 316 
transformationRef  159 
TransformationRefType  159, 316 
TransformationType  158, 315 
Triangle  74, 75, 82, 427, 433 
TrianglePatchArrayPropertyType  82, 433 
trianglePatches  82, 433 
TriangleType  74, 75, 427 
TriangulatedSurface  82, 83, 433, 434, 510 
TriangulatedSurfaceType  82, 83, 433, 434 
tuple  4, 8, 46, 48, 98, 99, 109, 110, 115, 122, 123, 126, 127, 149, 156, 157, 251, 307, 345 
tupleList  250, 251, 256, 346 
type  3, i, xxi, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 


49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 
90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 99, 100, 101, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, 120, 121, 122, 123, 125, 
126, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 135, 137, 138, 139, 140, 141, 142, 143, 144, 145, 146, 150, 151, 152, 153, 154, 155, 156, 157, 158, 
159, 160, 161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 166, 167, 169, 170, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 176, 177, 178, 179, 180, 181, 182, 183, 184, 185, 186, 187, 188, 
189, 190, 191, 192, 193, 194, 196, 197, 198, 199, 200, 203, 204, 205, 206, 207, 208, 209, 210, 212, 213, 214, 215, 216, 224, 225, 226, 227, 228, 
229, 230, 231, 232, 233, 234, 235, 236, 237, 239, 240, 241, 242, 244, 245, 246, 247, 248, 249, 250, 251, 252, 254, 255, 257, 263, 267, 268, 269, 
270, 271, 272, 273, 274, 275, 276, 277, 278, 281, 282, 283, 284, 285, 286, 287, 288, 289, 290, 293, 294, 295, 301, 303, 304, 305, 306, 307, 308, 
309, 310, 311, 312, 313, 314, 315, 316, 317, 318, 319, 320, 321, 322, 323, 324, 325, 326, 327, 328, 329, 330, 331, 332, 333, 334, 335, 336, 337, 
338, 339, 340, 341, 342, 343, 344, 345, 346, 347, 348, 349, 350, 351, 352, 353, 354, 355, 356, 357, 358, 359, 360, 361, 362, 363, 364, 365, 366, 
367, 368, 369, 370, 371, 372, 373, 374, 375, 376, 377, 378, 379, 380, 381, 382, 383, 384, 385, 386, 387, 388, 389, 390, 391, 392, 393, 394, 395, 
396, 397, 398, 399, 400, 401, 402, 403, 404, 405, 406, 407, 408, 409, 410, 411, 412, 413, 414, 415, 416, 417, 418, 419, 420, 421, 422, 423, 424, 
425, 426, 427, 428, 429, 430, 431, 432, 433, 434, 435, 436, 437, 439, 440, 441, 442, 443, 444, 445, 446, 447, 448, 449, 450, 451, 452, 453, 454, 
455, 456, 457, 458, 459, 460, 461, 462, 463, 464, 465, 466, 467, 468, 469, 470, 471, 472, 473, 474, 475, 476, 477, 478, 479, 480, 481, 482, 483, 
484, 485, 486, 487, 488, 489, 492, 493, 497, 498, 502, 511, 514, 521, 524, 525, 526, 527, 530, 536, 537, 539, 560, 562, 564, 565, 566, 569, 570, 
571, 572, 573, 574, 575, 576, 577, 578, 579, 582, 583, 586, 587, 589, 590, 591, 593, 594, 595, 597, 598, 599, 602, 603, 604, 605, 606 


U 


UML  9, 10, 12, 17, 22, 25, 26, 98, 101, 103, 111, 124, 136, 150, 168, 202, 210, 211, 228, 266, 307, 309, 325, 335, 351, 354, 442, 451, 490, 491, 492, 
493, 495, 501, 511, 512, 514, 516, 520, 521, 522, 525, 527, 529, 530, 531, 534, 535, 536, 537, 538, 539, 541, 543, 544, 545, 546, 547, 562, 563, 
564, 565, 566, 567, 568, 569, 570, 571, 572, 573, 574, 575, 576, 578, 579, 585, 586, 592, 593, 594, 595, 597, 598, 599 


UnitDefinition  213, 214, 215, 224, 478, 479, 492 
UnitDefinitionType  213, 214, 215, 478, 479, 492 
unitDerivation  214, 215 
UnitDerivationType  215 
unitOfMeasure  170, 212, 213, 353 
UnitOfMeasureType  212, 215, 216, 478, 480, 572 
units  19, 21, 43, 125, 126, 206, 211, 212, 213, 215, 216, 218, 219, 220, 221, 222, 223, 224, 225, 227, 231, 233, 234, 235, 237, 240, 242, 251, 252, 253, 


256, 259, 260, 262, 264, 265, 275, 492 
units.xsd  14, 169, 212, 351, 352, 390, 445, 446, 478, 601 
unitTerm  215, 218, 219, 220, 221, 222, 223 
uom  19, 21, 43, 125, 126, 206, 211, 212, 213, 215, 216, 218, 219, 220, 221, 222, 223, 224, 225, 227, 231, 233, 234, 235, 237, 240, 242, 251, 252, 253, 


256, 259, 260, 262, 264, 265, 275, 336, 492 
URI  2, 7, 8, 15, 16, 17, 29, 30, 42, 149, 185, 188, 189, 207, 211, 213, 224, 230, 231, 268, 285, 303, 391, 443, 457, 460, 482, 483, 492, 541, 563, 570, 


578, 586 
URL  9, 284, 532, 543 
UserDefinedCS  131, 132, 341 
userDefinedCSRef  131 
UserDefinedCSRefType  131, 341 
UserDefinedCSType  131, 341 
usesAxis  127, 128, 337 
usesCartesianCS  116, 117, 119, 328, 330, 333 
usesCS  117, 118, 331, 332 







ISO/CD 19136 OGC 03-105r1 


24  OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 
 


usesEllipsoid  114, 139, 327, 359 
usesEllipsoidalCS  114, 327 
usesEngineeringDatum  118, 119, 332 
usesGeodeticDatum  114, 116, 327, 328 
usesImageDatum  119, 120, 333 
usesMethod  157, 158, 314, 316 
usesObliqueCartesianCS  119, 120, 333 
usesOperation  156, 157, 311 
usesParameter  162, 163, 320 
usesPrimeMeridian  139, 359 
usesSingleOperation  155, 156, 310 
usesSphericalCS  116, 328 
usesTemporalCS  120, 334 
usesTemporalDatum  120, 121, 334 
usesValue  157, 158, 314, 316 
usesVerticalCS  115, 328 
usesVerticalDatum  115, 328 
using  239, 240, 241, 242, 450 
UTC  xxii, 185, 188, 195, 199, 457, 466 


V 


validArea  105, 106, 137, 146, 150, 153, 154, 309, 313, 315, 355, 358, 452 
validate  103, 105 
validTime  38, 184, 203, 204, 206, 239, 240, 241, 242, 375, 376, 450 
value  159, 160, 161, 162, 232, 233, 234, 251, 252, 253, 256, 259, 260, 262, 264, 265, 317, 318, 483, 484 
Value  231, 232, 233, 234, 235, 236, 250, 259, 292, 345, 484, 485, 486, 487 
ValueArray  232, 233, 234, 235, 250, 259, 345, 484, 486 
ValueArrayPropertyType  232, 486 
ValueArrayType  233, 484 
valueComponent  232, 233, 234, 251, 252, 253, 256, 259, 260, 262, 264, 265, 483, 484 
valueComponents  232, 233, 234, 251, 252, 253, 256, 259, 260, 264, 265, 483, 484 
valueFile  160, 161, 317 
valueList  160, 161, 317 
valueObjects.xsd  14, 212, 228, 229, 292, 296, 344, 449, 481, 601 
valueOfParameter  160, 161, 317 
valueProperty  232 
ValuePropertyType  232, 236, 485, 486, 487 
valuesOfGroup  161, 162, 318 
vector  47, 60, 62, 65, 69, 70, 71, 78, 99, 100, 237, 243, 374, 397, 492, 533 
VectorType  46, 47, 60, 61, 64, 69, 70, 246, 397, 413, 414, 417, 418, 421, 445, 492, 571, 575, 583, 597 
verification  12 
version  104, 453 
Vertical  109, 110, 115, 122, 124, 135, 145, 327, 357, 358 
VerticalCRS  114, 115, 327, 328 
verticalCRSRef  115 
VerticalCRSRefType  115, 328 
VerticalCRSType  114, 327 
VerticalCS  115, 129, 130, 328, 339, 340 
verticalCSRef  130 
VerticalCSRefType  115, 130, 328, 339 
VerticalCSType  129, 339 
VerticalDatum  115, 145, 328, 357, 358 
verticalDatumRef  145 
VerticalDatumRefType  115, 145, 328, 358 
verticalDatumType  145, 357 
VerticalDatumType  145, 357 
VerticalDatumTypeType  145, 357 
verticalExtent  105, 106, 454 
vocabulary  3, 101, 109, 283, 284, 286, 287, 289, 291, 292, 293, 295, 296 







 


 OGC and ISO 2004  All rights reserved 25 
 


 


VolumeType  224, 492, 572, 597 


W 


WFS  10 
WKT  9 


X 


xlink  7, 15, 24, 25, 26, 27, 34, 40, 187, 196, 197, 201, 210, 211, 217, 218, 234, 238, 240, 241, 242, 249, 254, 275, 277, 286, 303, 343, 373, 380, 389, 
399, 404, 407, 438, 439, 443, 444, 466, 470, 481, 487, 488, 489, 536, 571, 581, 585, 600, 601, 606, 607, 608 


Xlinks  6, 7, 13, 15, 21, 22, 24, 25, 26, 27, 34, 37, 99, 100, 101, 110, 135, 173, 174, 175, 176, 187, 196, 197, 201, 210, 211, 217, 218, 234, 238, 240, 
241, 242, 249, 254, 275, 282, 288, 495, 497, 498, 499, 500, 502, 511, 512, 513, 514, 517, 519, 520, 526, 527, 528, 529, 535, 536, 540, 544, 570, 
572, 573, 576, 599, 601, 606 


xlinks.xsd  15, 25, 268, 277, 381, 382, 383, 384, 385, 386, 387, 390, 392, 394, 395, 399, 400, 403, 406, 436, 439, 443, 487, 581, 607 
xml  xxi, 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 15, 17, 18, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 30, 31, 33, 36, 37, 38, 39, 41, 46, 54, 55, 86, 87, 90, 101, 102, 103, 


110, 124, 135, 136, 149, 161, 168, 184, 187, 188, 189, 190, 207, 208, 209, 210, 213, 216, 217, 224, 227, 228, 229, 230, 231, 252, 275, 278, 280, 
283, 284, 285, 286, 287, 290, 291, 292, 294, 295, 297, 298, 299, 301, 302, 303, 304, 305, 307, 318, 324, 334, 343, 351, 354, 363, 371, 372, 373, 
374, 375, 376, 377, 380, 381, 382, 383, 384, 385, 386, 387, 389, 390, 392, 394, 395, 399, 400, 403, 404, 406, 407, 436, 438, 439, 441, 442, 443, 
444, 445, 446, 448, 449, 450, 451, 455, 456, 457, 459, 460, 461, 462, 463, 464, 465, 466, 467, 468, 469, 470, 478, 481, 482, 483, 487, 490, 491, 
498, 512, 522, 524, 525, 526, 527, 529, 530, 532, 533, 536, 547, 548, 552, 553, 560, 562, 563, 567, 568, 569, 570, 571, 572, 573, 574, 575, 576, 
578, 581, 585, 586, 587, 589, 591, 592, 593, 594, 597, 599, 600, 601, 606, 607, 609, 614 
content model  16, 17, 24, 25, 27, 28, 30, 32, 33, 34, 35, 39, 40, 41, 45, 183, 184, 185, 186, 188, 190, 192, 193, 194, 195, 196, 197, 198, 199, 200, 


203, 208, 209, 213, 215, 216, 224, 225, 227, 228, 229, 234, 235, 237, 239, 247, 248, 249, 250, 254, 255, 257, 259, 260, 262, 263, 264, 268, 269, 
273, 276, 277, 283, 284, 285, 286, 292, 294, 295, 301, 439, 440, 442, 443, 484, 576, 587, 590, 593, 594 


instance document  12, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 27, 28, 186, 196, 207, 211, 224, 225, 226, 227, 231, 282, 283, 284, 285, 286, 439, 482, 568, 586, 592 
Namespace  7, 9, 15, 98, 214, 267, 277, 278, 281, 282, 283, 284, 285, 286, 287, 289, 290, 291, 292, 293, 294, 295, 296, 363, 439, 480, 491, 547, 


563, 569, 570, 571, 573, 581, 585, 586, 587, 588, 589, 591, 592, 594, 595, 597, 600, 601, 606, 607 
schemaLocation  171, 256, 258, 260, 261, 265, 285, 286, 287, 289, 290, 291, 292, 294, 295, 296, 308, 325, 335, 343, 344, 352, 354, 363, 371, 373, 


375, 377, 380, 390, 399, 404, 407, 438, 439, 444, 446, 449, 451, 455, 461, 466, 470, 478, 481, 571, 581, 586, 607, 612 
substitution group  23, 24, 25, 27, 31, 32, 33, 39, 40, 42, 43, 48, 49, 51, 90, 101, 183, 184, 185, 190, 192, 206, 225, 228, 231, 232, 236, 240, 248, 


249, 250, 281, 284, 285, 292, 295, 344, 364, 390, 391, 406, 409, 410, 411, 412, 414, 415, 416, 418, 420, 422, 424, 439, 441, 455, 456, 457, 459, 
461, 467, 482, 499, 536, 591 


XML Linking Language  2, 13, 21, 25, 43, 48, 49, 51, 52, 54, 68, 76, 77, 85, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 268, 280, 381, 382, 383, 384, 385, 386, 
387, 388, 389, 390, 392, 393, 394, 395, 399, 400, 403, 406, 407, 426, 428, 435, 436, 467, 468, 469, 488, 533, 569, 579 


XML Pointer  2, 31, 209, 373, 443, 446 
XML Schema  xxi, 1, 2, 3, 11, 13, 15, 17, 18, 20, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 30, 36, 37, 38, 39, 41, 46, 54, 55, 86, 87, 90, 101, 135, 187, 188, 189, 190, 


216, 224, 228, 229, 231, 280, 283, 284, 285, 286, 287, 291, 292, 294, 295, 299, 302, 304, 305, 406, 442, 443, 446, 459, 460, 481, 482, 483, 490, 
491, 498, 512, 522, 524, 525, 526, 527, 529, 530, 532, 533, 547, 548, 560, 562, 568, 569, 570, 571, 572, 575, 576, 578, 585, 586, 591, 592, 594, 
597, 599 


XSLT  10, 539, 540, 600 
 


 










