
EA-SIG Enterprise Service Management White Paper

1 3/15/2004

Enterprise Architecture Special Interest Group
(EA-SIG)

Enterprise Service Management Working Group
(ESM)

Version 1.0 Draft
February 20, 2004

Prepared for the
Defense Information Systems Agency

NCES Program Office
By the

Open GIS Consortium, Inc. (OGC)
Enterprise Architecture Special Interest Group

Contributors
Matt Murray - Raytheon
Jeff Stollman - IBM
Shue-Jane Thompson – Northrop Grumman
Terry Plymell – Raytheon
Eli Hertz - SAIC
Chuck Heazel – Lockheed Martin

Disclaimer:  This document represents the consensus view of the members of the EA-SIG Enterprise
Service Management Working Group.  The contents of this document do not necessarily represent the
views or policies of the Department of Defense nor of the employers of working group members.



Enterprise Architecture Special Interest Group (EA SIG)

Enterprise Service Management (ESM)

White Paper

2 3/15/2004

Change Log
Date Author Description Version Affected

Pages
2/13/04 C. Heazel Near-final draft 0.9

2/17/04 Matt Murray Updates throughout doc.  Removed Use Case
Section, Commercial Analog Section and ESM
Contract Options Section.  These sections have
inputs but the inputs are incomplete and not mature.
Will continue to work these sections and add them
in the future.

0.9.1 All

2/19/04 Matt Murray Added Recommendation Section and Appendix B –
ITIL Framework

1.0 23-26

2/20/04 EA-SIG Delivery of Version 1.0 to DISA 1.0



Enterprise Architecture Special Interest Group (EA SIG)

Enterprise Service Management (ESM)

White Paper

3 3/15/2004

Table of Contents
1 Introduction ............................................................................................................................................ 4

2 Scope ...................................................................................................................................................... 5

3 ESM Description .................................................................................................................................... 5

3.1 ESM Capabilities............................................................................................................................ 8

3.1.1 ESM Interface with Core Enterprise Services (CES) ........................................................... 12

3.2 Service Level Management (SLM) Overview.............................................................................. 13

3.3 Quality of Service (QoS) Overview ............................................................................................. 15

4 Technology Analysis ............................................................................................................................ 16

4.1 ESM Standards ............................................................................................................................. 16

4.2 ESM Technology/Solutions.......................................................................................................... 20

4.2.1 On-line Functions ................................................................................................................. 20

4.2.2 Off-line Functions................................................................................................................. 20

4.2.2 Technology Map to Vendor Products ................................................................................... 21

4.2.3 Futures .................................................................................................................................. 22

5 ESM Issues and Recommendations...................................................................................................... 22

6 Recommendations ................................................................................................................................ 23

6.1 Near Term – Today....................................................................................................................... 23

6.2 Long Term – 5+ Years ................................................................................................................. 23

Appendix A - Terms..................................................................................................................................... 25

Appendix B – ITIL Framework.................................................................................................................... 27



Enterprise Architecture Special Interest Group (EA SIG)

Enterprise Service Management (ESM)

White Paper

4 3/15/2004

1 Introduction
Figure 1 depicts the broad scope of GIG Enterprise Services (GES). As the enterprise services component
of the Global Information Grid, GES is the infrastructure on which DoD computer applications (e.g., C2,
Combat Support, Medical) rely. GES in turn relies on the GIG transport services such as the Defense
Information System Network (DISN) and tactical communications systems. DISN and tactical
communications systems consist of transmission systems, distribution/switching systems, Video
Teleconferencing (VTC) and packet and other support infrastructures. 

While GES relies upon the GIG transport services for the exchange between the Core Enterprise Services
(CESs) and the Community of Interest (CoI) capabilities, transport is not an inherent component of GES.
There are nine CES:Application, User Assistance, Storage, Messaging, IA/Sceurity, Discovery, Mediation,
Collaboration, and Enterprise Service Management (ESM) services.  CES will be part of a common IT
infrastructure that provides reliable, secure and efficient  information delivery to decision makers and war-
fighters.

This document focuses on the goals, objectives, capabilities and recommendation for the ESM Core
Enterprise Service.  The charter for this team was to address three fundamental questions: 

What it Enterprise Service Management?

What can we buy or build today?

How should we invest for the future?

This paper responds to those questions by defining and describing ESM, discussing what is being done
today, and what the group sees for the future of ESM?

GIG Enterprise Services
Support real-time & near-real-time warrior needs, and business usersSupport real-time & near-real-time warrior needs, and business users

DoD (Title 10) IC (Title 50)

UsersUsers

Business  Domains Warfighter Domains

Force 
Application

COI’
s Protection

Command & 
Control

Strategic Planning
& Budget

Logistics

Domain/ 
COI 

Capabilities

IC
Org Spaces

National Intelligence 
Domain

Core Enterprise  Services (CES)
Transformational Communications (TC) & Computing Infrastructure

Accounting & FinanceAccounting & Finance

Application
User 

Assistant
Storage Messaging

ICSIS 
Community 
Space

Acquisition

Installation 
& Environment

COI’s

COI’s

COI’s

Focused 
Logistics

Human Resource 
Management
Human Resource 
Management

Battlespace  
Awareness

IA/Security

IA/Security
ESM

IA/Security
ESM

IA/Security
ESM

Discovery

IA/Security
ESM

Collaboration

IA/Security
ESM

Enterprise 
Service

Management 
(ESM)

Mediation

IA/Security
ESM

IA/Security
ESM

Technical 
Infrastructure 

Domain

ESM

IA/Security

Cross Domain 
COI’s 

(e.g.  M&S)

Levels of 
Services 

Above Core 
Level

Expedient COI’sExpedient COI’s



Enterprise Architecture Special Interest Group (EA SIG)

Enterprise Service Management (ESM)

White Paper

5 3/15/2004

Figure 1 – GIG Enterprise Services

2 Scope
Mission operations today are heavily dependent to the enterprise IT capabilities. Traditional network
management that focuses merely on status monitoring and fault recovery of the transport layer components
is no longer sufficient.  Successful mission performance requires end to end process results which meet the
standards set for that process. Therefore, the trend of ever increasing importance of IT capabilities has
triggered rapid evolution of IT infostructure management. Traditional node based or component based
monitoring and reporting is no longer sufficient. Many new technologies evolved to mitigate the capability
gaps, correlation and analysis engine, root cause analysis capability, event aggregation and suppression,
web-based user interfaces, service level management, etc… 

 

Network
Management

Enterprise
Service

Management

Enterprise
Management

Enterprise Service Management Evolution Path

Network management – Focuses on transport layer monitoring and fault recovery. A reactive management
style supporting network engineers and administrators by detecting infrastructure faults (mainly in
network) and alert them for the fault detected.

Enterprise Management – Focuses on Fault, Configuration, Accounting, Performance, and Security
(FCAPS) management areas. It expands the management scope from just network node up and down status
to include network, systems, storage, and applications health status.  

Enterprise Service Management (ESM)- Focus on over all service performance and performance objectives
that are agreed as stated in a Service Level Agreement (SLA) or other type of understanding or agreement
document such as a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU),  a Memorandum of Agreement (MOA),  or an
Operational Level of Agreement (OLA).  ESM focuses on managing the end users’ experience. Service
planning is driven by the users requirements and success is based on whether or not the required service
performance is met.

Traditional network operation center (NOC) or today’s Network operation and security center (NOSC)
focuses on infrastructure operation status, mainly on network, system and application availability, and fault
recovery. Often these centers are not seamlessly integrated with IT service planning, provisioning, or
customer services etc.  Without end to end service management capability, overall service performance
status is an unknown. Thus, IT service quality assurance is often reactive and only managed by incidents;
we must now become proactive and be concerned with the end to end performance.

3 ESM Description

 Enterprise Service Management (ESM) “focuses on selecting, sizing, and loading those applications that
operate the GIG infrastructure or are used to administer the GIG infrastructure (e.g., Operating Systems,



Enterprise Architecture Special Interest Group (EA SIG)

Enterprise Service Management (ESM)

White Paper

6 3/15/2004

System Utilities, Data Management Systems, Auditing Software, and System Management and Reporting
Applications, Monitoring Software). NetOps personnel perform this activity. It takes hardware
configurations, GIG architecture information, and Standard Net-Centric Operating Procedures, and supplies
system applications that run and manage the GIG.” – NCOW

 “[ESM] is the set of services provides end-to-end GIG performance monitoring, configuration
management and problem detection/resolution, as well as enterprise IT resource accounting and addressing,
for example, for users, systems and devices. Additionally, general help desk and emergency support to
users is encompassed by this service area, similar to 911 and 411. – D. Meyerriecks, Net-Centric Enterprise
Services

Enterprise Services Management (ESM) provides a suite of processes, procedures and services –
capabilities that ensure that GIG Enterprise Services are up and operating within tolerances specified in
Service Level Agreements (SLAs) to achieve the Department’s objectives. As such, ESM requires a wide
range of capabilities including:

• Establishing Service Level Agreement (SLA) and Quality of Service (QoS) objectives

• Enterprise level monitoring of global net configuration

• Enterprise activity auditing

• Infrastructure and service management

• Performance quality management

• Survivability and Fault Tolerance fail-over

• Maintenance of supporting policies and procedures

In a net-centric environment, the operational management of the underlying infrastructure becomes a
mission-essential task. In many cases mission critical services are increasingly dependent on distributed net
capabilities that must be managed end-to-end. To support mission critical services, the underlying
infrastructure should be planned, built, sized, implemented, operated and managed to meet target, end-state
GIG operational requirements.

Further, ESM solutions for non-deployed and deployed environments must be:

• capable of supporting 7x24x365 operations

• at least as reliable as the systems they support

• meet current and emerging security requirements

• be interoperable across traditional organizational enclave boundaries

• be easy to use and maintain with effective service desk support.

• Be scalable and modular to allow for the future addition of capabilities or to replace underlining
technologies or products. 

Enterprise Service Management enables the life cycle management of all the capabilities of, and services
provided by the GIG Enterprise Services (GES), thereby enabling NETOPS of GIG systems, networks, and
their defense, through standard technological solutions (people, tools, process and integration).  Activities
covered by ESM include:

• planning, 

• design, 

• development, 

• organization, 



Enterprise Architecture Special Interest Group (EA SIG)

Enterprise Service Management (ESM)

White Paper

7 3/15/2004

• coordination, 

• staging, 

• implementation, 

• monitoring, 

• maintenance and 

• disposition.

Command and control of the GIG in support of the war fighter and all other aspects of DoD providing clear
and contiguous global network operations and defense, direction, oversight, situational awareness,
readiness reporting, prioritization, collaboration, and arbitration end-to-end.

Figure 2 provides an overview of the relationship between Enterprise System Management (ESM) and
Network Operations (NETOPS).  The combination of the two results in the guaranteed and secure delivery
of information to the war-fighter.

Figure 2 – NETOPS + ESM = Assured network availability, assured information
delivery and assured information protection – end-to-end

GIG NETOPS
Command and control of the GIG 

in support of the war fighter and all 
other aspects of DoD.  Providing 

clear and contiguous global 
network operations and defense, 
direction, oversight, situational 
awareness, readiness reporting, 
prioritization, collaboration, and 

arbitration end-to-end.

ESM Technical Environment
• Enterprise technical standards, policies 
and rules
• Technical development and integration 
of situational awareness and cross- domain 
management information exchange
• Technical development and integration 
service level management
• Technical development and integration 
of performance monitoring and analysis
• Life cycle management of GES services

SCOPE of GIG-ES-ESM
Establish an integrated set of 
technological tools, policies, rules that:
• Guide developers of CES for ESM 
and NETOPS compliance
• Implement standards based solutions 
for ESM and NETOPS

NETOPS C 2 Operations
Hierarchy

• USSTRATCOM JFHQ- 1O
• Global: JTF- GNO GNCC
• Theater/ Functional: COCOM 
Coordination Centers
• Service/ Agency: NOSCs,
NOCs, Systems Management 
Centers
• Tactical: JTF- JCCC

Enterprise Service Management (ESM)
Enables the life cycle management ( planning, design, developing, organizing, 

coordinating, staging, implementing, monitoring, maintenance and disposition ) of 
all the capabilities of, and services provided by, GIG Enterprise Services (GES), 
thereby enabling NETOPS of GIG systems, networks, and their defense, through 

standard technological solutions (people, tools, process and integration). 

GIG NETOPS
Command and control of the GIG 

in support of the war fighter and all 
other aspects of DoD.  Providing 

clear and contiguous global 
network operations and defense, 
direction, oversight, situational 
awareness, readiness reporting, 
prioritization, collaboration, and 

arbitration end-to-end.

ESM Technical Environment
• Enterprise technical standards, policies 
and rules
• Technical development and integration 
of situational awareness and cross- domain 
management information exchange
• Technical development and integration 
service level management
• Technical development and integration 
of performance monitoring and analysis
• Life cycle management of GES services

SCOPE of GIG-ES-ESM
Establish an integrated set of 
technological tools, policies, rules that:
• Guide developers of CES for ESM 
and NETOPS compliance
• Implement standards based solutions 
for ESM and NETOPS

NETOPS C 2 Operations
Hierarchy

• USSTRATCOM JFHQ- 1O
• Global: JTF- GNO GNCC
• Theater/ Functional: COCOM 
Coordination Centers
• Service/ Agency: NOSCs,
NOCs, Systems Management 
Centers
• Tactical: JTF- JCCC

Enterprise Service Management (ESM)
Enables the life cycle management ( planning, design, developing, organizing, 

coordinating, staging, implementing, monitoring, maintenance and disposition ) of 
all the capabilities of, and services provided by, GIG Enterprise Services (GES), 
thereby enabling NETOPS of GIG systems, networks, and their defense, through 

standard technological solutions (people, tools, process and integration). 



Enterprise Architecture Special Interest Group (EA SIG)

Enterprise Service Management (ESM)

White Paper

8 3/15/2004

3.1 ESM Capabilities 
A summary of ESM capabilities, description of service and industry examples of the ESM services (as they
would apply to GIG operational support) is provided in Table 1.

NCES Enterprise Service Registry
Description: ESM shall operate and maintain the
“catalog” of GIG Enterprise Service offerings to
include developing, deploying, operating, and
maintaining the processes and technical solutions
necessary for IT service offerings to be registered
and advertised, e.g. a UDDI registry for GIG
Enterprise Services based on Web-service
implementations along with other technical
solutions as may be required to register and
advertise non-Web-service based service offerings.

Functions:

• Efficient registration of services to be
managed (NCES and domain specific
services)

Configuration Management
Description: ESM shall provide an automated and
manual Configuration Management (CM) capability
for NCES configuration items including security,
for example hardware, software, and system/service
documentation as well as for non-NCES hosted,
provided, or supported customer configuration items
operating in, resident on, or relevant to NCES
operations and the NCES operational environment.
NCES CM data shall include both non-operational
and operational characteristics, e.g. serial numbers
as well as router port assignments.  NCES CM data
shall be made available electronically in a standard
format to other NCES and non-NCES services as
required.

Functions:

• Problem/Change Management

• Hardware/Software Asset Management

• Application Management

• Security Management

End-to-End Performance Monitoring and Analysis
Description: ESM shall provide the capability to
continuously monitor and analyze the performance
of individual service elements, components,
connections and/or the end-to-end performance of
NCES services.  Key elements of performance
management are:

Functions:

• SNMP Core Framework

• Network/Host/Device Management

• Fault Detection/Fault Isolation

• IS Analysis and Reporting

• Service Level Management

• Performance Baseline & Optimization

• Performance Trending

• Capacity Planning

• Threshold Monitoring

NCES Service Life-Cycle Management



Enterprise Architecture Special Interest Group (EA SIG)

Enterprise Service Management (ESM)

White Paper

9 3/15/2004

Description: ESM shall provide a service life-cycle
management process that ensures the integrated and
synchronized planning, design, development,
provisioning, deployment, operation and
maintenance, management, and retirement of NCES
services.  

Functions:

• Life Cycle management of assets and
services

• Efficient and automated ‘hand-off’ of new
services to on-line ESM/NETOPS

• Provides a defined base line and
environmental frame work for planning
design and development. 

NCES Infrastructure Management
Description: ESM shall provide an integrated
operational infrastructure management capability
for NCES LANs and supporting communications
equipment, e.g. CSU/DSUs, that provide
connectivity to WANs and other transport systems
as well as for non-IT systems and services as may
be required.  Infrastructure management capabilities
shall include robust and secure fault, configuration,
accounting, performance, and IA/security
management (FCAPS) of NCES infrastructure
components as well as capacity, availability, and
scheduling management.  

Functions:

• SNMP Core Framework

• Network Management

• Host Management

• Application Management

• Facility Management

• Internet Services Management

• Database Management

Integrated Service Management 
Description: ESM shall provide an integrated
operational enterprise service management
capabilities to include robust and secure fault,
configuration, accounting, performance, and
IA/security management (FCAPS) of all NCES
services (and of their sub-services, elements, and
components) as well as capacity, availability,
scheduling, and storage management.  In addition to
commonly required management capabilities, the
NCES ESM service shall also develop capabilities
that address the specific or unique requirements of
each NCES service, e.g. managing a messaging
service requires a somewhat different set of
functional capabilities and technical solutions than
what may be required to manage a discovery service
and vice versa.

Functions:

• Service Level Management

• User Interface/Centralized Status Console

• I/S Analysis and Reporting Services

Cross-Domain Management Information Exchange
Description: ESM shall be fully able to seamlessly
and securely exchange required management
information between Combatant Command,
Service, Agency, Allied, and Coalition operational
IT management domains as governed by NCES and
other applicable security policies.  This attribute
does not include the automated exchange of
management information between different security

Functions:

• Establish and track SLA between NCES
and Domains

• Interface Control Definitions for the
efficient exchange of management
information



Enterprise Architecture Special Interest Group (EA SIG)

Enterprise Service Management (ESM)

White Paper

10 3/15/2004

levels or boundaries, e.g. between NIPRNet and
SIPRNet or across a US-to-Coalition network
boundary.

NCES Service Level Management
Description: ESM shall provide the capability to
create, measure, monitor, manage, and enforce
negotiated Operational and/or Service Level
Agreements (OLA/SLAs) governing the end-to-end
delivery of each GIG Enterprise Service and its sub-
services, elements, and components.  OLA/SLAs
may be negotiated and created between one or more
service providers as well as between a service
provider and its customers and may be implemented
across one or more management domain.

Functions:

• Service Level Management

• User Interface/Centralized Console

NCES Quality of Service (QoS) Management
Description: ESM shall provide the capability to
measure, monitor, manage, and enforce Quality of
Service (QoS) mechanisms that are developed and
deployed to ensure that NCES service related traffic
is processed and delivered based assigned priorities.
While ESM is not directly responsible for the
development and deployment of NCES QoS
capabilities, ESM shall coordinate the development
and approve the deployment of all NCES QoS
capabilities to ensure that they are compatible and
interoperable.  ESM shall also coordinate NCES
QoS capability development with GIG network and
transport service providers, e.g. GIG-BE, TCI,
JTRS.

Functions:

• Service Level Management

• Component / Element Management

• Fault Management

NCES Operational Process Management
Description: NCES ESM shall develop and utilize
an operational process model that supports the rapid
identification, tracking, resolution, and
documentation of NCES-related incidents, reported
problems, and service requests to ensure the quick
restoration of NCES services with the minimum
impact to the user.  NCES operational processes
shall be based on industry standards, e.g.
Information Technology Infrastructure Library
(ITIL) and Telemanagement Forum (TMF), and
accepted best practices and lessons learned from
government and commercial organizations
responsible for IT operational management.

Functions:

• ESM tool and process support and
integration of NETOPS

NCES NETOPS Situational Awareness
Description: NCES shall provide managers at all
levels with comprehensive and relevant NETOPS
situational awareness that will enable them to
determine the end-to-end operational status and

Functions:

• Integration with NETOPS



Enterprise Architecture Special Interest Group (EA SIG)

Enterprise Service Management (ESM)

White Paper

11 3/15/2004

associated mission or business impacts of any
NCES service (or combination of services) in near
real time.  This will require close coordination and
the exchange of relevant management information
at multiple levels with the organizations, facilities,
and systems responsible for the operational
management of GIG network and transport services.

Information Assurance/Security
Description: ESM capabilities shall meet
applicable DoD and/or DCI Information Assurance
requirements.  IA/Security CES should be
integrated into the ESM CES to ensure the
protection and operations of the GIG.

Functions:

• Integration with Security operation center,
tools and process to provide a complete
picture of the operations and seciuirty of
the GIG

• Correlation of security events with
Enterprise events (network, servers,
application, data…..)

• Security of the ESM ‘application and data’

Enterprise Service Desk
Description: ESM shall provide a service desk
capability to support NCES user and customer
incident and service request reporting, prioritization,
tracking, management, and resolution.

Functions:

• Customer interface – help desk and service
desk functions

• User sastisfaction

Enterprise Software Distribution
Description: The ESM Software Distribution
capability shall verify that all software or
documentation has been obtained from authorized
sources before making it available for use.

Functions:

• Software distribution, remote monitoring,
analysis, version control

• Document management

NCES User Provisioning and Profile Management
Description: ESM shall provide automated and
manual user account and dynamic profile
management capabilities that will enable the
management and administration of enterprise users
and their corresponding profiles to include
passwords, preferences, and establishing access to
enterprise services.  This service offering will be
closely coordinated with supporting IA/Security and
User Assistance services.  

Functions:

• User Management

• Directory services

• Password/access management

ESM Support for Disconnected Operations
Description: ESM shall be able to effectively
manage NCES services and users when they
become isolated or disconnected from a service
through a fault in the service, in a supporting

Functions:

• Dial up management capabilities



Enterprise Architecture Special Interest Group (EA SIG)

Enterprise Service Management (ESM)

White Paper

12 3/15/2004

service, or through a fault in the underlying
transport or communications networks.  ESM shall
be capable of identifying when a user has become
isolated and alert other NCES services to which the
user is subscribed to ensure that any service is
delivered via alternative means, queued for later
delivery, etc.  ESM shall also be capable of
notifying NCES services when disconnected users
are restored to service.

• Push software via Web services

• On-board diagnostic tools, self help tools

• Automated installation of management
data via CD or Web

• Process to support users via phone, PDA or
walk in 

Remote Management 
Description: ESM shall provide the capability to
perform remote service element and component
configuration/reconfiguration of existing non-NCES
systems, services, and components that have
management capabilities.  

Functions:

• Agent technology that provides dial up or
direct connect access to geographically
disperse IT assets

• Ability to manage across low band width

• Software distribution

• Analysis and problem resolution

• Re-configuration

Survivability
Description: ESM capabilities shall be protected
against all potential threats commensurate with the
identified NCES threat environment and shall
ensure continuity of NCES service operations in a
manner that assures that services meet Operational
and Service Level Agreements (OLAs/SLAs).
Threats include but are not limited to physical
threats such as fire, water damage, power outage,
natural events, and information operation or
electronic threats such as cyberattack or
Electromagnetic Pulse (EMP).  Where applicable
the elements in the OLAs/SLAs shall be
implemented in the local digital policy and in some
cases the organizational level digital policies.

Functions:

• COOP capabilities

• Redundancy

• Backup/Recovery

Table 1 - ESM Capabilities

3.1.1 ESM Interface with Core Enterprise Services (CES)

NCES Core Enterprise Services (CES) identify nine critical IT capabilities that are required for efficient,
guaranteed and secured end-to-end Net-Centric capabilities.  Of these nine capabilities, Enterprise Services
Management and Information Assurance/Security have the objective to ensure the operation and security
integrity of Net-Centric services.



Enterprise Architecture Special Interest Group (EA SIG)

Enterprise Service Management (ESM)

White Paper

13 3/15/2004

A key underlying tenet of CES Enterprise Services Management is that all CES and Community of Interest
(CoI) services must be “manageable” in all deployed operational environments. This means that they must
be equipped or instrumented with the appropriate set of built-in ESM capabilities and that they must
support agreed upon operational policies, processes and procedures. For NCES Increment I this means that
every CES and CoI service must be able to securely monitor, detect changes in, and publish:

• The activity of critical processes and resource utilization and accurately and securely report
anomalous behavior that breaches agreed upon thresholds

• Their operational configuration and accurately and securely report any changes in configuration or
operational status

• Their overall operational performance and accurately and securely report any failure to meet
agreed upon service level agreements

Their security status and to accurately and securely report on any changes in security status to include any
anomalous security behavior that could be indicative of a cyber-attack directed against the service

In addition, all deployed services must:

• Meet minimum DoD IA requirements as outlined in DoDD 8500.1 Information Assurance and
DoDI 8500.2 Information Assurance Implementation

• Provide adequate and timely service desk support and

• Support CES EMS trouble identification, reporting, escalation, resolution and notification
processes and procedures

This means that ESM will be an integral set of capabilities that must be built-into every CES and COI
service whenever possible, as well as being a stand-alone service or functional capability that will be used
to proactively management critical NCES components. COTS and 3rd party software components not
engineered to interoperate with ESM will need to be brought into the fold via service mediators or other
bridging technologies (such as SNMP).

To accomplish this, the ESM will develop guidelines that other CES and COI services must follow in
implementing their management capabilities as well as compliance criteria that will be used to ensure that
management capabilities are correctly implemented.

3.2 Service Level Management (SLM) Overview
Service-level management (SLM) is critical in order to define, achieve, and maintain required levels of
NCES services in support of the warfighter and all users.  SLM provides a way to maintain accountability,
whereby availability and reliability of applications, servers, and networks that affect a service can be easily
tracked and maintained according to agreed upon guidelines. Resulting metrics contribute to defining and
meeting service-level agreements (SLAs).  It is imperative that sound processes linked with people skill-
mix and organizational structure exist to successfully realize SLM objectives.  According to Sturm, Morris
and Jander in Foundations of Service Level Management, a good service level agreement:

• “Provides permanence 

• Provides clarity 

• Serves as a communications vehicle 

• Guards against 'expectations creep' 

• Sets mutual standards for service 

• Defines how a level of service will be measured"



Enterprise Architecture Special Interest Group (EA SIG)

Enterprise Service Management (ESM)

White Paper

14 3/15/2004

There are three basic types of SLAs, and they are:

• In-House SLA - This is an agreement negotiated between the service provider, such as an IT
department, and an in-house user department. Don't assume that because the SLA is negotiated
between two departments in the same company, that the agreement is without teeth. Because the
nature of some companies' business requires significant levels of availability, they have in-house
SLAs in place with their IT departments that require 100% availability. And this level of service
can actually be used as a selling point to external customers.

• External SLAs - External SLAs are agreements that any company that's purchasing services such
as IT from an external provider like an ASP or MSP can't be without. If a company gets less-than-
acceptable service from its ASP, for example, and does not have an SLA in place, that company
may not have many options to either force the ASP to address the problem or terminate their
contract without penalties. Conversely, if a company does negotiate an SLA with a service
provider, the agreement should be reviewed by an attorney before signing, since it is a legally
binding contract. 

• Internal SLAs - These types of SLAs are usually informal agreements within a department for
achieving certain performance goals, and for measuring progress in achieving those goals. They
may not even be written as separate documents, but may be part of other plans such as individual
achievement goals for the purpose of receiving bonuses. 

Creating an SLA must begin with serious commitments from top-level managers from both the service-
provider and the user groups to negotiate a fair and equitable agreement. The agreement should be
negotiated on as level a playing field as possible: the group actually given the task of negotiating the
agreement should comprise equal numbers of individuals from both stakeholder groups, and the leaders
representing each stakeholder should have nearly the same rank within the organizational hierarchy. A
good rule of thumb to follow regarding the size of a negotiating group is, for a medium-to-large company,
there should be four to 10 individuals. 

Each member of the negotiating team should have some unique expertise to bring to the process, like in-
depth business knowledge about how the service affects the user department's productivity or bottom line
or knowledge about the technology that the service provider needs to provide the requested service level.
At the onset of negotiations, the group leaders should write a charter for the group defining aspects like
group responsibilities, membership, functions and so on. 

To expedite the process, all constituents should know certain specifics about the agreement ahead of time,
if possible provide a “strawman” or proposed SLAs.   The negotiators must understand the cost and the
variables for the proposed level of  service and the benefits of the service level being requested.
Additoinally ,  the group should have information available about the current service levels and how the
services are measured. 

Beyond defining who are the parties in the SLA (i.e., the service provider and the customer), a number of
components make up an SLA, including the following:

• Term - defines the period of time that the SLA will cover. This is usually no more than two years,
since technology will advance too fast for a longer-term agreement to be meaningful.   An industry
best practice is to review the SLA annually to insure the proper metrics are being measured and
that the focus of the metrics are consistent with the prorities of the enterprise.  

• Scope - defines the services covered in the agreement. This might include what specific business
process will be covered, which users of this process will be covered, at what times during the
day/week will the service-level requirements be effective, and so on. This section does not cover
the service levels to be provided. 

• Limitations - defines what must happen in order for the requested service levels to be provided.
This includes items like what volume of transactions the service provider might be required to



Enterprise Architecture Special Interest Group (EA SIG)

Enterprise Service Management (ESM)

White Paper

15 3/15/2004

handle, the cost of hiring the staff necessary to provide the levels of service, and so on. The
bottom line is, service providers have to believe they can really provide the required levels of
service before they agree on them. To keep the SLA realistic, they must build into the agreement
limitations that take into consideration future variables like growth in demand, opening or closing
user facilities and integrating disparate computing systems into the current one. 

• Service-level objectives - are the levels of service that both the users and the service providers
agree on, and usually includes availability, performance and accuracy. Each aspect of the service
level, such as availability, will have a target level to achieve. (But the agreement might include
two measures for each aspect: a minimum-acceptable level of service to achieve, and a stretch
level of service that the provider should aim to achieve and can be rewarded for achieving.)
Availability can be measured in units of time (e.g., hours or days) or in percentages. Performance
can be measured by volume of work accomplished (e.g., transactions) or speed. Accuracy can be
measured in terms of whether or not the service is doing what it should be doing. Note: In an SLA,
there is no right number of service-level objectives - aim for between five and ten. 

• Service-level indicators - the means by which these levels can be measured. The best way to
measure service levels is from the user's perspective - how much time were the services that users
need to do their jobs or to do business available and how responsive were the services? However
these user perceptions are measured, the SLA will need to document each service-level indicator
used to measure the objectives, and to specify the data source for each. 

• Nonperformance - spells out what happens if the service provider does not meet the objectives in
the SLA. If the agreement is with an external service provider, the option of terminating the
contract in light of unacceptable service levels should be built in. Nonperformance penalties can
range from a rebate of a percentage of what an external service provider is charging annually in
maintenance fees to a mandatory meeting between the service provider's and the user's top
executives to discuss the service lapse. But whether the SLA is in-house or external, penalties can
be important for the SLA to have real meaning for everyone concerned. 

• Optional services - provides for any services that are not normally required by the user, but might
be required as an exception. An example of this would be extra hours of IT service for an e-
business during the busy Christmas shopping season. 

• Exclusions - specifies what is not covered in the SLA. Reporting - is a key component of SLM.
These provide the means to determine whether or not the service provider is living up to its
commitments in the SLA. So, the reports must be relevant to these objectives, must reflect the
means of measuring the objectives stated in the SLA, and they must be communicated so that the
audience they are intended for can understand them. When discussing reporting requirements, an
SLA should include information such as the name of each required report, the frequency that each
report will be generated, and the content of each report. 

• Administration - describes the processes created in the SLA to meet and measure its objectives
and defines organizational responsibility for overseeing each of those processes. 

• Reviews - establishes regularly scheduled reviews between the user and service-provider
constituents of an SLA. 

• Revisions - provides for any revisions necessary to keep the SLA extant for all parties.

• Approvals - Signatures on the dotted line: the SLA is signed, sealed and delivered.

3.3 Quality of Service (QoS) Overview 
Quality of Service has two meanings in the ESM space.  First, it generically refers to the fact that different
tiers of service may be offered for the same functionality.  Second, it is used to refer to the ability of a
single IT resource (e.g., the network or a server) to provide distinctly different service levels.  These are
discussed separately below. 



Enterprise Architecture Special Interest Group (EA SIG)

Enterprise Service Management (ESM)

White Paper

16 3/15/2004

Quality of Service as a service tier 

In the enterprise IT space, not all services need to adhere to the same service levels.  The availability and
responsiveness requirements of a service component within the “sensor-to-shooter” process a similar
component used to process an overnight business batch job.   To provide a single service level for
enterprise availability and enterprise responsiveness would either jeopardize mission effectiveness in the
“sensor-to-shooter” area or drive inordinate cost across the enterprise to support higher than needed service
levels for back-office functions.  It is, therefore, valuable to segregate the various IT services offered into
tiers or service. 

Currently, to devise separate tiers for each and every service would require too much manpower to
establish the specific service levels for each service.  Accordingly, common practice is to offer three levels
of service (often referred to as Gold, Silver, and Bronze) and cluster services into one of these as a
reasonable trade-off between service levels and cost.  There are no fixed service levels associated with
these three categories.  Neither is there any magic about the number three.  Three levels provides flexibility
without making the process unmanageable. 

Quality of Service as a way to segregate the services offered by a single resource 

Quality of Service (especially when used in the abbreviated form, “QoS”) is commonly used to refer to the
ability to divide the service supplied by a single resource to give yield different service levels for different
users of the same service.  For example, the entire concept of “grid computing” is predicated on server
management software that can provide resources to a primary application on an as-needed basis, and
scavenge remain cycles to support an additional application that will take whatever it can get.  The
guaranteed level of service afforded the servers primary application is called its QoS. 

Another more pressing example is network bandwidth where QoS is cited as the primary barrier to
widespread use of Voice over IP (VoIP).  Currently, Internet Protocol as implemented in todays routers
does not offer QoS.  Network packets (whether data, voice, or video) are dynamically routed on a best-
efforts basis. This “best-efforts” process results in the data getting from sender to receiver, even when parts
of the network fail during the transmission.  During a failure, packets are just rerouted to other parts of the
network that are available.  As a result, different packets in a transmission may take different routes and
arrive at the destination at different times.  This is generally adequate for data traffic because data will be
recombined at the destination, regardless of what order it arrived in.  However, for audio traffic (e.g., VoIP)
the transmission is “live” and the out-of-order packets will “play” in the order in which they are received,
resulting in garbled audio.  The problem can be worse for video.  For video traffic, the transmission can be
lost from the point at which the network had to reconfigure the routing of the transmission.  And for
encrypted traffic, the entire message can be lost.  What is needed is the ability to guarantee not only the
successful transmission of a message from Point A to Point B, but also a guarantee that the packets will
arrive in order:  maintaining the integrity of audio, video, and encrypted messages.  This guarantee is called
QoS.   

Solutions exist to solve this problem, but one has not yet become the international standard.  These
solutions support multiple levels of QoS so that traffic can be prioritized.  This prioritization not only
allows message integrity to be guaranteed, but it also allows messages of high-priority to “bump” (or
reduce available bandwidth for) messages of low priority in order to optimize the available bandwidth.  For
example, tactical direction from headquarters to a field unit could preempt the transmission of a movie
being sent across the network to entertain the troops.

4 Technology Analysis

4.1 ESM Standards
Enterprise Service Management has evolved a long way from the early days of Network Management,
System Management, Enterprise Management to today’s service objectives of Enterprise Service
Management.  The standards have also evolved from early versions of Open Systems Interconnect Simple



Enterprise Architecture Special Interest Group (EA SIG)

Enterprise Service Management (ESM)

White Paper

17 3/15/2004

Network Management Protocol (SNMP) and the very popular FCAPS (Fault, Configuration, Accounting,
Performance and Security) framework to the new and evolving service based IT Information Library (ITIL)
developed by the Office of Government Commerce (OGC) reporting to the Chief Secretary to the Treasury,
British Government.  Figure 5.1 provides an overview of the current set of standards that can be utilized in
developing NCES’s ESM capability.

Standard & Supporting
Organization

Overview 

(including objective)

Maturity

IETF Simple Network Management
Protocol (SNMP)

OSI Common Management
Information Protocol (CMIP)

OSI’s FCAPS Framework

Distributed Management Task Force
(DMTF) – Web-Based Enterprise
Management (WBEM)

[formally Desktop Management TF]

DMTF’s Desktop Management
Interface (DMI)

DMTF’s Common Information Model
(CIM)

OMG’s CORBA

WWW Consortium - SOAP

Organization for the Advancement of
Structured Information Standards
(OASIS) - Web Application Security
(WAS)

To produce a classification scheme for
Web security vulnerabilities, a model to
provide guidance for initial threat, impact
and risk ratings, and an XML schema to
describe Web security conditions for use
with assessment and protection tools.

New – started May 2003

Web Services Distributed Management
(WSDM)

To define Web services management; to
use Web services architecture and
technology to manage distributed
resources, and to develop the model of a
Web service as a manageable resource.

New – started February 2003, with V1.0
due February 2004

Storage Network Industry Association
(SNIA), Storage Manage Initiative
Specification (SMI-S)

Provide storage customers a way to
manage multiple storage appliances from
different vendors. Before the proposed
specification, enterprise storage managers
would have had to manage each storage
appliance with vendor-specific tools and
work to integrate the disparate
information manually

New – Expected to announce Version 1.0
of SMI-S July 2003

The Open Group’s Enterprise
Management Forum – Various
Standards and technical guides on
Systems Management

Industry lead consortium establishing
standards and technical integration for
systems management

Mature, been in existence since 1995



Enterprise Architecture Special Interest Group (EA SIG)

Enterprise Service Management (ESM)

White Paper

18 3/15/2004

OGC’s IT Infrastructure Library
(ITIL)

ITIL provides a cohesive set of best
practice, drawn from the public and
private sectors internationally. It
is supported by a comprehensive
qualification scheme, accredited training
organisations, and implementation and
assessment tools. The best-practice
processes promoted in ITIL both support
and are supported by the British Standards
Institution’s Standard for IT Service
Management (BS15000).

Figure 5.2 – ESM Standards Overview

Web Services represent a new paradigm of computing, based on standards for various facets of software
development and usage.  Essentially they are business functions or services invoked, described, published,
and interacted with using XML based standards.  The attractiveness of the web Services concept lies in the
universal adoption of standards by all vendors alike.  This adoption promises to allow seamless
interoperability among the different heterogeneous implementations.  Standards are essential to Web
Services and Enterprise Service management (ESM) and are the drivers for their use in integration.  

The question of what technologies are available today for managing Web services may be like putting the
cart before the horse, as few organizations have advanced beyond the pilot stage in their Web service
projects.  Consequently, most early adopters have relatively few Web services to manage. That message
about what Web services and how to use them grew loud and clear from last years conferences.

Compounding the uncertainty in Enterprise Service Management is the lack of a firm standards roadmap
beyond the SOAP, WSDL and UDDI building blocks, or the existence of best practices to deploy Web
services.  Today, managing Web services is still the domain of service providers or start-up vendors. Aside
from service provider approaches, most of the current ideas rely on agents, probes, brokers or proxies to
monitor and, in some cases, adjust parameters ranging from authorizations to component dependencies and
code validation.

In general, the argument for brokers is that the technology is well established in the J2EE and Microsoft
.NET worlds. Consequently, if a firm knows IBM WebSphere or Microsoft Windows Servers, they should
be capable of getting up to speed with Web services brokering tools pretty readily. A drawback to brokers
is that they introduce potential bottlenecks and single points of failure to environments likely to have
numerous tiers.

For instance, Actional Corp., Mountain View, Calif., uses proxies that play traffic cop to incoming SOAP
messages. On the horizon, it also plans to add agents that would reside on app servers and provide higher-
level views of an entire service network. Iona Technologies, Waltham, Mass., is focusing more on the
development and deployment, rather than the management, of Web services.

Talking Blocks Inc. provides security features aimed at managing authentication and access monitoring
capabilities that log messages and provide the raw data for tracking utilization and generating alerts, as well
as performance management features such as load balancing and routing. Infravio Inc., promotes its life-
cycle management capabilities by providing several different views, including business objects, that
provide a schema-based logical view; a business service that provides a mechanical view of how the
message is transformed, transported and orchestrated; and an application model that focuses on brokering
services. 

Providers such as AmberPoint Inc., Flamenco Networks, Mindreef Inc. and Blue Titan Software Inc.
provide distributed, probe-like approaches that “sniff” SOAP messages over the wire, but for different
purposes. Mindreef Inc., focuses more on developers by providing debugging abilities through viewers that
display the content of SOAP messages or WSDL files as either raw XML or pseudocode -- stripping out



Enterprise Architecture Special Interest Group (EA SIG)

Enterprise Service Management (ESM)

White Paper

19 3/15/2004

the ubiquitous angle brackets and showing the remaining XML as plain English. To help with the
debugging process, Mindreef’s tools trace SOAP messages to verify whether they execute properly.

AmberPoint takes an operations-oriented view.  For instance, AmberPoint Inc. tracks performance and
transactions by type or business process, such as the number of orders or shipment requests processed, and
response times for those requests. Proxies intercept incoming requests and accept and redirect them, while
plug-ins run inside the application server.

Today, products such as Tivoli, Patrol, Unicenter and OpenView have agent technologies that can actively
manage infrastructure elements and activate alerts and consoles that provide the big picture on services
levels at the node level. Measuring traffic levels, response times, and the stops and starts of specific
operations is already second nature for most of the brand-name framework tools. Currently, these tools do
not probe inside a SOAP message or inspect its headers, but they can record end-to-end performance data
about when messages are sent or received, and how long it takes to process them.

Conceivably, another obvious point for managing Web services might be at the app server in the Java
world, or the OS for .NET. For instance, many middleware platform providers have consoles for
configuring and monitoring code execution, clustering, transaction pooling, load balancing and failover.
Yet players such as Microsoft have been conspicuously silent, while others have largely deferred to third
parties.

Having set the stage for a need for Web Services Management standards, Web services manageability is
defined as a set of capabilities for discovering the existence, availability, health, performance, and usage, as
well as the control and configuration of a Web service within the Web services architecture. This implies
that Web services can be managed using Web services technologies.

Figure 5.2 shows the generic Web Services Stack as proposed by the W3C Web Services architecture
group.  Though the Web Services stack provides standards for service description, messaging, registry and
security, a standard for Web Services management is yet to be addressed.

Figure 5.2 Conceptual Web Services Architecture Stack



Enterprise Architecture Special Interest Group (EA SIG)

Enterprise Service Management (ESM)

White Paper

20 3/15/2004

4.2 ESM Technology/Solutions
The ESM technology/solutions can be divided into two primary categories: On-line and Off-line.
On-line functions provide near-real-time management of specific operational resources.  Off-line
functions support planning, analysis, and support functions that are less time critical.

4.2.1 On-line Functions
SNMP Core Framework - The Core Framework or SNMP Management Core provides the basic
management console for topology display; the SNMP engine for polling and setting MIB objects, trap
generation, logging functionality; the basic management data repository and the foundation for the
integration of other tools. The core framework also includes the Manager-to-Manager (M2M) Interface
capability for the EMS to allow data exchange with other management systems in a standard way.

Network Management - Network Management provides the ability to monitor and control network
interconnect devices. Monitoring includes the collection and storage of key device parameters.  Controlling
includes the ability to affect the configuration of the device.  The data that is collected will support the
analysis of network traffic (availability, utilization, capacity, errors, and throughput) and the generation of
associated network performance profiles.

Host / Device Management - Host Management provides the capability to monitor, display, detect, set,
and report information about computer hosts and peripheral devices. Host parameters include accessibility,
CPU usage, memory usage, swap usage, and disk usage. Device Management provides the capability to
monitor and control other SNMP and non-SNMP devices connected to the enterprise network.

Application Management - Application Management provides the capability to monitor and control
software application processes on monitored computer hosts.  In addition, to the collection and display of
application parameters (performance, space, resource conditions, availability), application management
allows for the initiation and termination of application software directly from the management console.

Security Management – Security Management provides the capability to manage user and network
security across a distributed environment.  User security includes the management of available authorization
and authentication controls.  Network security includes the ability to protect the managed environment from
specific external accesses. Security Management may also provide capabilities for legal intercept support.

Fault Management – Fault Management provides the capability to detect, display, and report any failures
or threshold violations for all system resources.  In addition, Fault Management provides the necessary tools
to support correction of the identified fault. Fault Management also provides the capability to correlate errors
to support faster identification and resolution of related infrastructure / environment problems.

Facility Management – Facility Management provides the capability to monitor power, heating, and
cooling systems utilized in the managed enterprise.

User Interface / Centralized Status Console – User Interface provides the user's view into the EMS
System, this can include standard X Displays, Web Interfaces or other advanced approaches (e.g., web
portals). Centralized Status Console provides a custom view, tailored to user-needs of the enterprise domain
being managed. Centralized Status Console will also provide the capability to integrate status information
from multiple management domains into a single view (Manager-to-Manager).

Internet Services Management – Internet Services management provides the capability to monitor web
site availability, web page access ("hits"), e-mail traffic, ftp traffic, etc. Internet Services also support
messaging and paging functionality.

4.2.2 Off-line Functions
Information System Analysis & Reporting Services – Information System (I/S) Analysis provides
integrated tools to support trending and capacity planning for infrastructure resources. I/S Reporting
provides the capability to generate formatted reports and displays of available management information in
standard templates or user-defined formats. I/S Analysis & Reporting services also include modeling and
simulation functions.



Enterprise Architecture Special Interest Group (EA SIG)

Enterprise Service Management (ESM)

White Paper

21 3/15/2004

Problem / Change Management – Problem / Change Management provides the capability to support
the tracking of infrastructure problems & enhancements.  Problem Management also supports the creation
and execution of defined work-flow procedures.

Hardware & Software Asset Management – Hardware & Software Asset Management provides the
capability necessary to support the tracking of infrastructure resources including all hardware and software
assets.  Information includes physical location (host), building/room, owner, etc.  In addition, Hardware &
Software Asset Management provides the capability necessary to manage COTS Software Licenses &
COTS Software Maintenance Contracts, distribute COTS Software, and maintain an accurate COTS
Software Inventory.

Distributed System Administration – Distributed System Administration provides the capability to
access O/S level tools from the EMS console and to integrate the resulting data with the EMS data
repository. Distributed System Administration also supports the administration of time services, users
accounts, directory services and other common infrastructure capabilities.

Database / Archive Management – Database / Archive Management provides the capability to store
management data in a standard format.  Flat files will be used for the basic architecture and databases (e.g.,
RDBMS) will be used for Intermediate and Advanced architectures.  In addition, the database functionality
will then allow for addition, retrieval, modification, search, and display of available data about any system
resource. The Database / Archive Management function can also support the administrative interfaces
required to provide backup/restore and archive of the associated data when it is moved off-line as well as
providing statistical information related to database systems (usage, space requirements, backup status,
quota management). Although nominally intended for management information, this function can also
support the management and monitoring of non-management/operational data.

Service Level Management – Service Level Management provides the capability to ensure that service
level agreements for end-users are satisfied. Service Level Management also provides the necessary billing
and accounting services.

EMS Development Services – EMS Development Services provide the development tool kits necessary
to customize the EMS COTS components. 

4.2.2 Technology Map to Vendor Products
The vendor landscape for these technologies is extremely diverse.  The table below shows examples of
technologies and products that can be deployed to service the various functions.

EMS Function Technologies and Products

SNMP Core Framework HP OpenView (HPOV) NNM & Operations, IBM Tivoli, CA Unicenter, Sun
Managament Center (MC), FreshWater, Concord eHealth, SNMP Agents, IETF
RFC -based tools from SNMP Research

Network Management HPOV, Agents, Cisco LMS, Vendor MIBs

Host/Device Mgmt HPOV, Agents, Vendor MIBs, HP Insight Manager

Application Mgmt HP Operations (templates), HP Smart Plug-In, Agents, Custom-developed APIs

Security Mgmt NetRanger, CSPM, Cisco Secure, Tripwire, RSA, OPSEC Alliance

Fault Management Seagate NerveCenter, Expert System products

Facility Management HPOV, Liebert OnliNet, Carrier ComfortView, Veritas Nerve Center

I/S Analysis &
Reporting Services

HP Reporter / HP Internet Services, Concord eHealth

Problem / Change
Management

Remedy ARS, Remedy HelpDesk



Enterprise Architecture Special Interest Group (EA SIG)

Enterprise Service Management (ESM)

White Paper

22 3/15/2004

Hardware & Software
Asset Management

Peregrine Asset Manager, Novadigm, TIBCO Active Enterprise

Distributed System
Management

Solstice Admin

Database/Archive
Management

Oracle, SQL (Windows), Sybase, Ingres, HP DB SPI, Veritas, Legato, HP
OmniBack

User
Interface/Centralized
Status Console

X, HTML, PlumTree, iPlanet, Data Channel, HP Service Information Portal,
IBM WebSphere, Oracle Application Server, BEA WebLogic

Internet Services
Management

Web Trends, HP Internet Services, Concord eHealth

EMS Development
Services

HP Openview Development Toolkit

4.2.3 Futures
The future technologies in Enterprise Service Management are many, however there are a few key trends
and technologies to watch over the next two to five years including; server provisioning and configuration
management, web services management, UDDI, and real-time applications.  These technologies will
become very important over the next few years, especially for service based architectures.

Server provisioning and configuration management are tools that provide image management, auto-
discovery of hardware and software assets, change and configuration management (including application
updates, configuration settings, etc.), and dynamic provisioning (hardware or software virtualization).

Web Services Management is technologies like web services brokers and web services operations
management tools.  These tools manage the capacity, availability and performance of applications or
platforms.

Universal Description, Discovery and Integration (UDDI) is a directory service that has the ability to
integrate with enterprise management.  UDDI will provide capabilities for services to register and then be
managed by the ESM.

Real-time applications and infrastructure is a new concept that allows resources and technology to be made
available to consumers of the service on an as needed basis.  The model allows for an enterprise
management system to distribute resources to meet service level agreements and resource demands.

5 ESM Issues and Recommendations
1. To many standards to follow, and risk on selecting a standard that will not survive and be

supported by the COTS providers.

a. Recommendation:  Minimize risk - Wait for market/standards maturity.  Select more then
one standard to follow – No standard covers all elements of ESM. DISA must be
proactive in standards bodies to mature standards and protect investment.

2. To manage end-to-end services to support the war-fighter, DISA’s ESM will have to manager and
possible command, IT assets that are not owned by DISA but are owned by individual armed
forces, joint assets, IC assets and commercial assets.

a. Recommendation: create a Governance model that will allow DISA to see and possible
command IT assets that are key to the delivery of Network Centric services to the war-



Enterprise Architecture Special Interest Group (EA SIG)

Enterprise Service Management (ESM)

White Paper

23 3/15/2004

fighter.  To accomplish this, several items will be need including: MOUs between DISA
and other parties, manager-to-manager interface capability, standards for
product/capability integration, common data definition and a common EA for ESM
across the GIG, business domains, war-fighter domains and IC domains

3. Current, legacy mission systems are not defined and manageable as an Enterprise Service.
Defining  and developing a complete configuration of all current, legacy service components that
comprise a Mission Enterprise Service, can be time consuming and expensive.  

a. Recommendation:  Minimize the number of current systems that the Gov retrofits just for
ESM objectives.  Focus only on key legacy systems and services that are not planned for
near term replacement or upgrades.  Retrofit system with ESM hooks during upgrades
cycles.  Require ESM hooks and compliancy to NCES EMS Integration Requirements for
new DoD systems.

6 Recommendations

6.1 Near Term – Today
Recommend DISA build upon their current investment of network and system management tool with
incremental changes to lay down the foundation of process, tools and best practices to address the long
term goal of service based delivery of all war-fighter capabilities and future objectives of NCES.  We
recommend DISA consider the following:

• Adopt a standards based ESM framework that provides guiding principles for a service based
management solution.

o ITIL is a leading framework that could be adopted.  (See Appendix B - ITIL Framework
o DISA must participate with standards bodies
o Establish an ESM service oriented architecture

• Enhance current Network Management and System Management capabilities in the direction of
Service Level Management (SLM) and Quality of Service (QoS) solutions/capabilities

o Define, monitor, manage and adjust the service levels and the quality of
services/solutions that DISA currently delivers

 Start with 8 NCES services

o Initiate automated life cycle management process and tools of existing DISA assets and
services

• Promote the creation of a governance ESM model with the owners of the IT services in the war-
fighter domain, Business domains and Intel Community domain for real-time management of end
to end DoD/IT Services.

o Address “Fee for service” model, where the Services can get the best value or QoS model
from DISA

6.2 Long Term – 5+ Years
• All war-fighter services managed end to end as a service, not as IT parts of systems.

o Global ESM view of all services supporting the war-fighter
• Fully integrated ESM and Security Management (IA) services



Enterprise Architecture Special Interest Group (EA SIG)

Enterprise Service Management (ESM)

White Paper

24 3/15/2004

• Automated life cycle management of NCES

• Retire and replace systems that are not manageable or comply with a service based management
architecture

• Global view of all services for all domains and community of interest from a single (and
distributed) management center.

• Real time (immediate) ability to control the QoS of all services supporting the warfighter.



Enterprise Architecture Special Interest Group (EA SIG)

Enterprise Service Management (ESM)

White Paper

25 3/15/2004

 Appendix A - Terms

Ad-Hoc COI – an operational COI that forms in response to immediate events.  Ad-hoc COIs come into
existence to address an issues and disband once that issue have been resolved.

Application Schema – An application schema provides the formal description of the data structure and
content required by one or more information communities.  --- set of conceptual schema for data required
by one or more applications.

COI – Community of Interest.

DCP – Distributed Computing Platform

Feature – abstraction of a real world phenomenon or attribute of a system

Federation – an IT configuration where organizations and systems collaborate without a single
management framework.  

GML – Geographic Markup Language

Information Community - a collection of people (a government agency or group of agencies, a
profession, a group of researchers in the same discipline, corporate partners cooperating on a project, etc.)
who, at least part of the time, share a common digital geographic information language and common spatial
feature definitions.

Interface – named set of operations that characterize the behavior of an entity 

Jurisdiction - an administrative entity with a single management authority that can establish standard
policies, procedures, and technologies.  All systems within a jurisdiction are subject to this management
framework.

Metadata – data about data.

OGC – Open GIS Consortium

Ontology – the working model of entities and interactions in some particular domain of knowledge or
practices, such as electronic commerce or "the activity of planning." A set of concepts - such as things,
events, and relations - that are specified in some way (such as specific natural language) in order to create
an agreed-upon vocabulary for exchanging information In artificial intelligence (AI), an ontology is,
according to Tom Gruber, an AI specialist at Stanford University, "the specification of conceptualizations,
used to help programs and humans share knowledge.” .  One or more taxonomies can be developed for the
ontology and taxonomies can be used as part of the ontology model.

Operation – specification of a transformation or query that an object may be called to execute. Also, a
virtual enterprise established to achieve some real world goal (e.g., Operation Iraqi Freedom) – see Ad Hoc
COI

Operational COI - a collection of individuals, organizations, and systems with similar business and
information needs.  Operational COIs operate across Jurisdictions and Federations and in fact are the
primary reason for their existence.  Operational COIs develop their own operating conventions addressing
such issues as information models, policies, and practices.

Service – distinct part of functionality that is provided by an entity through interfaces accessible over the
GIG network.

Taxonomy – the science of classification according to a pre-determined system, with the resulting catalog
used to provide a conceptual framework for discussion, analysis, or information retrieval. In theory, the
development of a good taxonomy takes into account the importance of separating elements of a group
(taxon) into subgroups (taxa) that are mutually exclusive, unambiguous, and taken together, include all



Enterprise Architecture Special Interest Group (EA SIG)

Enterprise Service Management (ESM)

White Paper

26 3/15/2004

possibilities. In practice, a good taxonomy should be simple, easy to remember, and easy to use. However
most real world entities and concepts can be viewed as belonging to multiple taxonomies, based on the
operational context in which they are referenced. For example, a main battle tank is both a vehicle and a
weapon system. It can also be a shelter, cargo, asset, target, etc. in other operational contexts and thus
taxonomies.

Viewpoint – form of abstraction achieved using a selected set of architectural concepts and operational
contexts with associated structuring/representation rules, in order to focus on particular concerns within a
system development, acquisition, or virtual enterprise context.



Enterprise Architecture Special Interest Group (EA SIG)

Enterprise Service Management (ESM)

White Paper

27 3/15/2004

 Appendix B – ITIL Framework

Operation Support Service Management Mission Management

Desktops, servers,
Applications Space mission, Warfare,VTC, Web,-mail,

Operation Support Service Management Mission Management

Desktops, servers,
Applications Space mission, Warfare,VTC, Web,-mail,


	Introduction
	Scope
	ESM Description
	ESM Capabilities
	ESM Interface with Core Enterprise Services (CES)

	Service Level Management (SLM) Overview
	Quality of Service (QoS) Overview

	Technology Analysis
	ESM Standards
	ESM Technology/Solutions
	On-line Functions
	Off-line Functions
	Technology Map to Vendor Products
	Futures


	ESM Issues and Recommendations
	Recommendations
	Near Term – Today
	Long Term – 5+ Years


