
* 
Network Working Group                                            C. Reed 
Internet-Draft                                              Open Geospatial Consortium 
Expires: January 6, 2005                            August 2004 
 
 
              A URN namespace for the Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) 
 
              
Status of this Memo 
 
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC 2026 except that the right to 
   produce derivative works is not granted. Distribution of this 
   memo is unlimited. 
 
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other 
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts. 
 
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference material or to cite 
   them other than as "work in progress." 
 
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at  
   <http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt>. 
 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
 
   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 6, 2005. 
 
Copyright Notice 
 
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved. 
 
Abstract 
 
   This document describes a URN (Uniform Resource Name) namespace that 
   is engineered by the Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) for naming 
   persistent resources published by the OGC  (such as OGC Standards,   
   XML  (Extensible Markup Language) Document Type Definitions, XML  
   Schemas, Namespaces, Stylesheets, and other documents).  The formal  
   Namespace  identifier (NID) is "ogc". 
 



   Reed            draft-creed-ogc-urn-00.txt           [Page 1] 
Internet-Draft        A URN namespace for the OGC       August 6, 2004 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
   The Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) produces many kinds of technical  
   documents, including: specifications, working drafts, technical  
   reports, discussion papers, and XML schemas. The OGC wishes to  
   provide persistent, location-independent identifiers for these  
   resources. 
 
   The core mission of the OGC is to develop spatial interface  
   specifications that are openly available and royalty free. Products and 
   services that conform to OGC interface specifications enable users to freely 
   exchange and process spatial information across networks, computing 
   platforms, and products.  Interoperability in such an environment  
   is facilitated by the use of a system of persistent identifiers  
   that are global in scope. 
 
   Motivated by these concerns, the OGC would like to assign formal  
   URNs to published resources in order to provide persistent,  
   location-independent identifiers for them. The process for  
   registering a namespace identifier is documented in RFC 3406 [2]. 
   The official IANA registry of URN namespaces is available online: 
   <http://www.iana.org/assignments/urn-namespaces>. 
 
 
2. Specification Template 
 
   Namespace ID: 
 
      "ogc" requested. 
 
   Registration Information: 
 
      Registration Version Number: 1 
      Registration Date: 2004-09-20 
 
   Declared registrant of the namespace: 
 
      Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc. (Headquarters) 
      35 Main Street, Suite 5 
      Wayland, MA 01778-5037, USA 
      c/o Carl Reed (creed@opengeospatial.org) 
 



   Reed            draft-creed-ogc-urn-00.txt           [Page 2] 
Internet-Draft         A URN namespace for the OGC     August 6, 2004 
 
 
Declaration of structure: 
 
      The Namespace Specific String (NSS) is structured in accord with  
      the syntax described RFC 2141 [1]. All of the URNs assigned by  
      the OGC will have a hierarchical structure in which there are  
      four top-level category branches: 
 
         "specification", “service”, “tc”, “def” 
 
      The general structure of the NSS for all categories of the  
      hierarchy follows the same general form, based on Extended Backus-Naur 
       Form: 
 
         urn:ogc:{category.label}:{resource.group}:{resource.type} 
             {-resource.subtype}?{[doc.id]}?:{[resource.label]}?:{[release]}?: 
             {[parameters]} 
 
      where the parts are as follows: 
       
      category.label - one of "specification", "service", “def” or “tc”" 
      resource.group - a unique identifier for a particular collection 
          or group of resources.  An example of a useful grouping might 
          be 'catalogue' which groups resources created during the  
          development of the OGC Catalogue specification. This would be 
          indicated with a URN string beginning with:  

urn:ogc:specification:catalogue 
      resource.type - identifies the type of resource, such as a document, 
          working group, interface, schema, stylesheet, or model 
      resource.subtype - may be used to refine the resource type  
          [e.g. document subtypes such as “is” (implementation specification), 
            “dp” (discussion paper), “ap” (application profile), and “adt” (abstract  
             data type)]. The subtypes are assigned by the OGC Technical 
             Committee Chair with concurrence of the OGC Document 
             Subcommittee. 
      doc.id - OGC document number if one has been assigned [optional]. 
      resource.label - a short, mnemonic label for the resource [optional]. 
      release - version number or ISO date string [optional]. 
      Parameters – for category def only. A set of parameters related to a service 
      call. 
 
      Each category branch is described below and some examples for  
      each branch are provided; these examples are provided for informa- 



     Reed  draft-creed-ogc-urn-00.txt                     [Page 3] 
Internet-Draft       A URN Namespace for the OGC        August 6, 2004 
 
      tional purposes only. 
 
     Specification Branch [urn:ogc:specification] 
 
    The "specification" branch of the hierarchy identifies all published  
         OGC specifications and related supporting schemas. 
 
    Examples: 
 
         urn:ogc:specification:gml:doc-is(02-023r4):3.00 
         urn:ogc:specification:gml:schema-xsd:feature:3.01 
         urn:ogc:specification:catalogue-profile:doc-ap(03-094):0.8.0 
         urn:ogc:specification:catalogue-profile:schema-xsd:discovery:0.8.0 
         urn:ogc:specification:wfs-1.0:wsdl-1.1:interfaces:1.1 
 
 
      Service Branch [urn:ogc:service] 
 
         The "service" branch of the hierarchy identifies access to an OGC 
         enabled service. 
 
         Examples: 
         urn:ogc:service:CatalogueService:2.0:HTTP 
         urn:ogc:service:wms:3.0:HTTP 
         urn:ogc:service:CRS:2.0:HTTP:ebRIM 
         urn:ogc:service:WebFeatureService:1.0:HTTP 
 
 
      TC Branch [urn:ogc:tc] 
 
         The "tc" branch of the hierarchy identifies work products of 
         the various OGC Working Groups, SIGS, and committees of the OGC 
         technical committee. 
          
         Examples: 
         urn:ogc:tc:ows-2:doc-rfq(03-ijk):20031127 
         urn:ogc:tc:arch:doc-atb(03-040):refmodel:0.1.2 
         urn:ogc:tc:plenary:doc-minutes:20040620 
 
 
      Definition Branch [urn:ogc:def]          
         The "def" branch of the hierarchy currently references definitions of  
         coordinate reference systems, coordinate (transformation) operations,  



        Reed           draft-creed-ogc-urn-00.txt                    [Page 4] 
Internet-Draft          A URN namespace for the OGC      August 6, 2004 
 
         and components thereof, that are specified or recognized 
         by the OGC in a formal OGC document. The use of the “def”  
         category may be expanded in the future to accommodate the needs  
         of new  OGC  standards.   
     
         Examples: 
         urn:ogc:def:crs:EPSG:26986:6.3 
         urn:ogc:def:crs:OGC:WMS2:1.3 
         urn:ogc:def:crs:OGC:42003:1.3:1:-100:45 
 
   Relevant ancillary documentation: 
 
      None 
 
    Namespace Considerations: 
 
      There is currently no available namespace that will allow the OGC 
      to uniquely specify and access resources, such as schemas and registries, 
      that are required by organizations implementing OGC standards. There is  
      also a need for other standards organizations, such as OASIS and the 
      IETF to be able to access OGC specific resources. 
 
   Community Considerations 
      Many of the current OGC standards require access to resources, such as 
      schemas, registries, catalogues, OGC documents, and OGC  
      enabled services. In order for the larger IT community to be able to  
      effectively implement applications that access OGC resources, a unique 
      namespace is required. We desire these resources to be freely and 
      openly available as a set of community resources. 
  
   Identifier uniqueness considerations: 
 
      Identifier uniqueness will be ensured by the OGC when 
      assigning a URN to a resource 
 
   Identifier persistence considerations: 
 
      The OGC is committed to maintaining the accessibility and 
      persistence of all the resources that are assigned URNs. 
 
   Process of identifier assignment: 
 
      OGC may delegate authority for assignment of portions of its  



       Reed    draft-creed-ogc-urn-00.txt                  [Page 5] 
Internet-Draft         A URN namespace for the OGC     August 6, 2004 
 
      namespace to other parties.  Assignment is limited to the  
      authorized entity only and may not be re-assigned. 
 
   Process of identifier resolution: 
 
      No special resolution process is identified here, however it is 
      expected that OGC catalogue services will provide a facility for 
      retrieving resources by URI in a direct or brokered manner. 
 
   Rules for Lexical Equivalence: 
 
      URNs are lexically equivalent if they are lexically identical. 
 
   Conformance with URN Syntax: 
 
      No special considerations. 
 
   Validation mechanism: 
 
      None specified.  Users are recommended to confirm the validity  
      of OGC URN's by consulting the original documents. 
 
   Scope: 
 
      Global 
 
3. Security Considerations 
 
   There are no additional security considerations other than those 
   normally associated with the use and resolution of URNs in general. 
 
References 
 
   [1] Moats, R., "URN Syntax", RFC 2141, May 1997. Available [online]: 
       <http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2141.txt> 
 
   [2] Daigle, L. et al., "Uniform Resource Names (URN) Namespace  
       Definition Mechanisms", RFC 3406, October 2002. Available  
       [online]: <http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3406.txt>        
        
Author Address 
 
   Carl Reed, PhD 



Reed                            draft-creed-ogc-urn-00.txt              [Page 6] 
Internet-Draft         A URN namespace for the OGC     August 6, 2004 
 
   Executive Director Specification Program 
   Open GIS Consortium, Inc. 
   35 Main Street, Suite 5 
   Wayland, MA 01778-5037, USA 
   Email:   creed@opengeospatial.org 
 
Full Copyright Statement 
 
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights Reserved. 
 
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are 
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English. 
 
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 
 
   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET 
ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, 
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY 
WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL 
NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
 
Acknowledgement(s) 
Thanks to Jon Peterson, Leslie Daigle, and Arliss Whiteside for their review 
and comments. 
 

mailto:creed@opengeospatial.org

