
* 
Network Working Group                                            C. Reed 
Internet-Draft                                              
Expires: May x, 2007                               Open Geospatial Consortium 
                                                                November 2006 
 
 
              A URN namespace for the Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) 
 
              
Status of this Memo 
 
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79. 
 
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet- 
   Drafts. 
 
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
 
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
 
   This Internet-Draft will expire on May x, 2007. 
 
Copyright Notice 
 
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006). 
 
Abstract 
 
   This document describes a URN (Uniform Resource Name) namespace that 
   is engineered by the Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) for naming 
   persistent resources published by the OGC.  The formal  
   Namespace  identifier (NID) is "ogc". 
    



Reed            draft-creed-ogc-urn-01.txt           [Page 1] 
Internet-Draft        A URN namespace for the OGC       November 2006 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
   The Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) produces many kinds of technical  
   documents, including: specifications, working drafts, technical  
   reports, discussion papers, and XML schemas. The OGC wishes to  
   provide persistent, location-independent identifiers for these  
   resources. 
 
   The core mission of the OGC is to develop spatial interface  
   specifications that are openly available and royalty free. Products and 
   services that conform to OGC interface specifications enable users to freely 
   exchange and process spatial information across networks, computing 
   platforms, and products.  Interoperability in such an environment  
   is facilitated by the use of a system of persistent identifiers  
   that are global in scope. 
 
   Motivated by these concerns, the OGC would like to assign formal  
   URNs to published resources in order to provide persistent,  
   location-independent identifiers for them. The process for  
   registering a namespace identifier is documented in RFC 3406 [2]. 
   The official IANA registry of URN namespaces is available online: 
   <http://www.iana.org/assignments/urn-namespaces>. 
 
 
2. URN Specification for “ogc” NID 
 
   Namespace ID: 
 
      The NID "ogc" is requested. 
 
   Registration Information: 
 
      Registration Version Number: 1 
      Registration Date: 2006-11-20 
 
   Declared registrant of the namespace: 
 
      Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc. (Headquarters) 
      35 Main Street, Suite 5 
      Wayland, MA 01778-5037, USA 
      c/o Carl Reed (creed@opengeospatial.org) 
 



   Reed            draft-creed-ogc-urn-01.txt           [Page 3] 
Internet-Draft         A URN namespace for the OGC     November 20, 2006 
 
Declaration of syntactic structure: 
 
      The Namespace Specific String (NSS) of all URNs that use the "ogc" 
      NID will have the following structure: 
 
         urn:ogc:{OGCresource}:{ResourceSpecificString} 
 
      where the "OGCresource" is a US-ASCII string that conforms to the 
      URN syntax requirements [RFC2141] and defines a specific class of 
      resource type.  Each resource type has a specific labeling scheme 
      that is covered by "ResourceSpecificString", which also conforms 
      to the naming requirements of [RFC2141]. 
 
      The OGC maintains a naming authority, the OGC Web Services Common 
      Authority (OGCNA), that will manage the assignment of  
      "OGCresources" and the specific registration values assigned for each  
      resource class. 
 
Relevant ancillary documentation: 
 
      The OGC Naming Authority (OGCNA) provides 
      information on the registered resources and the registrations for each. 
      More information about OGCNA and the registration activities and 
      procedures to be followed are available at: 
 
         http://www.opengeospatial.org/ogcna 
 
   Identifier uniqueness considerations: 
 
      The OGCNA will manage resources using the "ogc" NID and will be the 
      authority for managing the resources and subsequent strings 
      associated.  In the associated procedures, OGCNA will ensure the 
      uniqueness of the strings themselves or shall permit secondary 
      responsibility for management of well-defined sub-trees. 
 
      OGC may permit use of experimental type values that will not be 
      registered.  As a consequence, multiple users may end up using the 
      same value for separate uses.  As experimental usage is only 
      intended for testing purposes, this should not be a real issue. 
 
 
Identifier persistence considerations: 
 



     Reed            draft-creed-ogc-urn-01.txt           [Page 3] 
Internet-Draft         A URN namespace for the OGC     November 20, 2006 
 
      OGCNA will provide clear documentation of the registered uses of 
      the "ogc" NID.  This will be structured such that each OGCresource 
      will have a separate description and registration table. 
 
      The registration tables and information will be published and maintained 
      by OGCNA on the OGC web site. 
 
   Process of identifier assignment: 
 
      OGCNA will use the approved OGC standards policies and procedures for 
      discussion, approval and registration of each type of resource that it  
      maintains (https://portal.opengeospatial.org/files/?artifact_id=12586) 
      Each such resource may have three types of registration activities: 
 
         1) Registered values associated with OGC specs or services 
         2) Registration of values or sub-trees to other entities 
         3) Name models for use in experimental purposes 
 
   Process for identifier resolution: 
 
      The namespace is not listed with an RDS; this is not relevant. 
 
   Rules for Lexical Equivalence: 
 
      No special considerations; the rules for lexical equivalence of 
      [RFC2141] apply. 
 
   Conformance with URN Syntax: 
 
      No special considerations. 
 
   Validation mechanism: 
 
      None specified.  URN assignment will be handled by procedures 
      implemented in support of OGCNA activities. 
 
   Scope: 
 
      Global 
 
3. Examples 
 
      The following examples are representative urns that could be assigned 

https://portal.opengeospatial.org/files/?artifact_id=12586


Reed          draft-creed-ogc-urn-01.txt                           [Page 5] 
Internet-Draft         A URN namespace for the OGC     November 2006 
     
     by OGCNA.  They may not be the actual strings that would be assigned. 
          
         urn:ogc:specification:gml:doc-is(02-023r4):3.00 
 
      Defines the urn to be used to identify a specific version of an OGC 
      specification document for the Geography Markup Language in the OGC 
      document archives. 
          
         urn:ogc:serviceType:CatalogueService:2.0:HTTP 
          
      Defines the urn to be used for an application to specify the specific service 
      type for an OGC Catalogue service. 
 
         urn:ogc:def:crs:EPSG:6.3:26986 
 
      Is the URN defined to reference the definition of the Coordinate Reference 
      System (CRS) with code 26986 that is specified in version 6.3 of the  
      EPSG database. 
 
    4.0 Namespace Considerations: 
 
      There is currently no available namespace that will allow the OGC 
      to uniquely specify and access resources, such as schemas and registries, 
      that are required by organizations implementing OGC standards. There is  
      also a need for other standards organizations, such as OASIS and the 
      IETF to be able to access OGC specific resources. 
 
   5.0 Community Considerations 
      Many of the current OGC standards require access to resources, such as 
      schemas, registries, catalogues, OGC documents, and OGC  
      enabled services. In order for the larger IT community to be able to  
      effectively implement applications that access OGC resources, a unique 
      namespace is required. We desire these resources to be freely and 
      openly available as a set of community resources. 
  
   6. Security Considerations 
 
     There are no additional security considerations other than those 
     normally associated with the use and resolution of URNs in general. 
 
7.0 Informative References 
 
   [1] Moats, R., "URN Syntax", RFC 2141, May 1997. Available [online]: 



   Reed          draft-creed-ogc-urn-01.txt                           [Page 6] 
Internet-Draft         A URN namespace for the OGC     November 2006 
       
      <http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2141.txt> 
 
  [2] Daigle, L. et al., "Uniform Resource Names (URN) Namespace  
       Definition Mechanisms", RFC 3406, October 2002. Available [online]:  
       <http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3406.txt>        
        
   Author Address 
 
   Carl Reed, PhD 
   Chief Technology Officer 
   Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc. 
   35 Main Street, Suite 5 
   Wayland, MA 01778-5037, USA 
   Email:   creed@opengeospatial.org
 
Full Copyright Statement 
 
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006). 
 
   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
   retain all their rights. 
 
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION 
   HE/SHE REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE 
   INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK 
   FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, 
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE 
   USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY 
   RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY 
   OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
 
Intellectual Property 
 
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information 
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 

mailto:creed@opengeospatial.org


 
   Reed          draft-creed-ogc-urn-01.txt                           [Page 7] 
Internet-Draft         A URN namespace for the OGC     November 2006    
 
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
    such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
 
    http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
 
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at 
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 
 
Acknowledgement(s) 
Thanks to Jon Peterson, Leslie Daigle, Simon Cox, Clemens Portele, Doug 
Nebert, Steven Keens, Josh Lieberman and Arliss Whiteside for their review 
and comments. 
 


