
OGC 07-027r1 

 

Open Geospatial Consortium Inc.  
Date: 2007-05-02 

Reference number of this OGC® document: OGC 07-027r1 

Version: 0.7.0 

Category: OpenGIS® Discussion Paper 

Editor: Clemens Portele 

Local MSD Implementation Profile (GML 3.2.1) 

 

Copyright notice 

Copyright © 2007 Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  
To obtain additional rights of use, visit http://www.opengeospatial.org/legal/. 

Warning 

This document is not an OGC® Standard. This document is an OGC Discussion 
Paper and is therefore not an official position of the OGC membership. It is 
distributed for review and comment. It is subject to change without notice and may 
not be referred to as an OGC Standard. Further, an OGC Discussion Paper should 
not be referenced as required or mandatory technology in procurements. 

Document type:     OpenGIS® Discussion Paper 
Document subtype:    if applicable 
Document stage:    Draft 
Document language:  English 

 
 

http://www.opengeospatial.org/legal/


OGC 07-027r1 

ii Copyright © 2007 Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 
 

Contents 

1 Scope........................................................................................................................1 

2 Security classification of specification..................................................................1 

3 Conformance ..........................................................................................................1 

4 Normative references.............................................................................................1 

5 Terms and definitions ............................................................................................2 

6 Symbols (and abbreviated terms).........................................................................4 

7 Overview .................................................................................................................5 

8 Formal data product specification .......................................................................5 
8.1 General remark......................................................................................................5 
8.2 Specification scope .................................................................................................6 
8.3 Data product identification ...................................................................................6 
8.4 Data content and structure ...................................................................................7 
8.5 Reference systems ..................................................................................................9 
8.6 Data quality ..........................................................................................................10 
8.7 Data capture .........................................................................................................16 
8.8 Data maintenance.................................................................................................16 
8.9 Portrayal ...............................................................................................................16 
8.10 Data product delivery ..........................................................................................17 
8.11 Additional information........................................................................................19 
8.11.1 General remarks ..................................................................................................19 
8.11.2 Security classification of data .............................................................................19 
8.11.3 Registers/registries...............................................................................................19 
8.12 Metadata ...............................................................................................................20 

9 Annex: List and definitions of feature types and properties............................21 

10 Annex: Views........................................................................................................22 

11 Annex: Local MSD GML Applciation Schema.................................................23 
 



OGC 07-027r1 

Copyright © 2007 Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  iii
 

i. Submitting organizations 

The following organizations submitted this document to the Open Geospatial Consortium 
Inc.:  

- interactive instruments GmbH 

ii. Document Contributor Contact Points 

All questions regarding this submission should be directed to the editor or the submitters: 

CONTACT COMPANY EMAIL 

Clemens Portele interactive instruments 
GmbH 

portele at interactive-
instruments.de 

David G. Wesloh NGA David.G.Weslo at nga.mil 

Jeffrey R. Bell NGA Jeffrey.R.Bel at nga.mil 

iii. Revision history 

Date Release Author Paragraph modified Description 

 2006-11-01  0.1  CP  Initial draft  

 2007-01-31  0.2  DW/CP   Updated based on NGA input, annexes 
added 

 2007-03-02  0.3  CP  Updated based on discussions during 
telecons 

 2007-03-20  0.4  CP  Updates based on general review of the 
document 

2007-03-25  0.5  CP/DW  Final updates based on latest Local MSD 
schema, revision by Dave Wesloh  

2007-04-09  0.6  CP  Changes to definitions in GML 
dictionary and XSLT stylesheets only 
(Annex A) 

2007-5-02 0.7 Carl Reed Cover page, headers, etc Get ready for posting as a DP. 



OGC 07-027r1 

iv Copyright © 2007 Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 
 

iv. Changes to the OpenGIS Abstract Specification 

The OpenGIS® Abstract Specification does not require changes to accommodate the 
technical contents of this document.  



OGC 07-027r1 

Copyright © 2007 Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  v
 

Foreword 

Attention is drawn to the possibility that some of the elements of this document may be 
the subject of patent rights. The Open Geospatial Consortium Inc. shall not be held 
responsible for identifying any or all such patent rights. 

Recipients of this document are requested to submit, with their comments, notification of 
any relevant patent claims or other intellectual property  rights of which they may be 
aware that might be infringed by any  implementation of the specification set forth in this 
document, and to  provide supporting documentation. 

 



OGC 07-027r1 

vi Copyright © 2007 Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 
 

Introduction 

This document contains a data content specification for Local Mission Specific Data 
(MSD) and is based on the GEOINT Structure Implementation Profile (GSIP) developed 
by the NGA. This document defines the GML 3.2.1 (ISO 19136) encoding requirements 
for Local MSD. The structure of the document is based on ISO/DIS 19131 (Geographic 
Information – Data Product Specification). 

The Local Mission Specific Data Data Content Specification (DCS) was developed as 
part of the Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) Interoperability Program. 

OGC employs a variety of innovative techniques to enable developers and integrators to 
rapidly and efficiently test, validate, and document specifications based on user 
requirements. One technique that is part of the Interoperability Program is the Open Web 
Services (OWS) Testbed. This document was developed as part of the testing, evaluation 
and implementation process, within the OWS phase 4 (OWS-4), specifically designed to 
evaluate the encoding of MSD in Geography Markup Language (GML) as well as test the 
use of MSD within a web services architechture.  

 

 

 



Interoperability Program Report OGC 07-027r1

 

Copyright © 2007 Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  1
 

Local MSD — Data Content Specification 

1 Scope 

This document defines the content and format for Local Mission Specific Data (Local 
MSD) as it is encoded in Geography Markup Language version 3.2.1. This document will 
either directly define or define through reference the content and format requirements 
when encoding Local MSD in GML. 

NOTE This document provides a description of the content, accuracy, data format, and design of Local MSD 
data collections and is based on the current draft of ISO 19131, the forthcoming ISO standard for data product 
specifications for geograhic information products. 

2 Security classification of specification 

This document is UNCLASSIFIED. 

3 Conformance 

Local MSD data encoded in GML shall conform to the GML 3.2.1 conformance class 
defined in GML 3.2.1 Subclause 2.5, i.e. pass all conformance tests in GML 3.2.1 Annex 
A.3. The GML application schema referenced shall be an exact copy of the Local MSD 
GML Application Schema version 1.0. 

Local MSD data shall fullfil all mandatory requirements stated in Clause 8. In particular, 
features, attributes, enumerants and associated geometries for Local MSD shall be in 
conformance with those identified within the National System for Geospatial Intelligence 
Feature Catalog. 

Dataset level metadata shall be in conformance with ISO 19115:2003 and shall be 
encoded following the rules and definitions found in ISO/TS 19139:2007. 

4 Normative references 

The following normative documents contain provisions which, through reference in this 
text, constitute provisions of this document. For dated references, subsequent 
amendments to, or revisions of, any of these publications do not necessarily apply. 
However, parties to agreements based on this document are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the normative documents indicated 



OGC 07-027r1 

2 Copyright © 2007 Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 
 

below. For undated references, the latest edition of the normative document referred to 
applies. 

GEOINT Structure Implementation Profile, Version 1.8 (draft) 

NOTE This document can be obtained from http://www.nga.mil/portal/site/nga01/standards/GSIP 

NOTE The GEOINT Structure Implementation Profile (GSIP) contains the NSG Feature 
Catalog plus other information 

Digital Feature Extraction Guide (DFEG)  

NOTE This document is not yet published. Once published, a URL reference will be provided as part of this 
document. 

ISO/TS 19103:2005, Geographic Information – Conceptual Schema Language 

NOTE This document can be obtained from the International Organisation for Standardisation. 

ISO 19109:2004, Geographic Information – Rules for Application Schemas 

NOTE This document can be obtained from the International Organisation for Standardisation. 

ISO 19136:--, Geographic Information – Geography Markup Language (GML) 

NOTE This document can be obtained from the Open Geospatial Consortium Inc. or the International 
Organisation for Standardisation; the version used for drafting this document is the version submitted by ISO/TC 211 
to ISO Central Secretariat for publication as ISO 19136 (GML 3.2.1). 

ISO/TS 19139:--, Geographic Information – Metadata – XML Schema Implementation 

NOTE This document can be obtained from the International Organisation for Standardisation; the version used 
for drafting this document is the version submitted by ISO/TC 211 to ISO Central Secretariat for publication as ISO/TS 
19139. 

GEOINT Structure Implementation Profile Schema Processing IPR, OGC document 07-
028 

NOTE This document can be obtained from the Open Geospatial Consortium Inc. 

In the event of a conflict between the text of this document and the references cited 
herein, the text of this document takes precedence. Nothing in this document, however, 
supersedes applicable laws and regulations unless a specific exemption has been 
obtained.  

5 Terms and definitions 

5.1  
data product specification 
detailed description of a dataset or dataset series together with additional information that 
will enable it to be created, supplied to and used by another party [ISO/DIS 19131] 

Clemens Portele
This may not be the final URL.

http://www.nga.mil/portal/site/nga01/index.jsp?epi-content=GENERIC&itemID=ef18df0a1aa5bf00VgnVCMServer63727a95RCRD&beanID=1629630080&viewID=Article


OGC 07-027r1 

Copyright © 2007 Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  3
 

5.2  
data content specification 
detailed description of a class of data, datasets or dataset series together with additional 
information that will enable members of that class to be created, supplied to and used by 
another party  

NOTE 1 A data content specification provides a description of the universe of discourse and a specification for 
mapping the universe of discourse to a class of datasets. It may be used for production, sales, end-use or other purpose.  

NOTE 2 A data content specification is not directly associated with a specific data collection, dataset, or dataset 
series. 

5.3  
Mission Specific Data (MSD)  
MSD provides the required geospatial detail (at the needed density/resolution and 
accuracy) and features and/or attributes to meet specialized mission needs. MSD can be 
of many types – to include elevation data, imagery, or vector features. 

5.4  
Global Foundation Data  
Low density global coverage of essential features used for strategic planning and 
monitoring. This data is the underlying layer of feature data that will be intensified into 
mission specific data. Global data depicts only the general character of the terrain and 
features of considerable prominence. These features change rarely or slowly. Global 
information supports initial planning level and reference data views. 

5.5  
Regional Mission Specific Data (Regional MSD)  
Medium density regional coverage used for operational planning to meet mission 
requirements. Regional Mission Specific Data will have the same geometry as Local 
Mission Specific Data, but different (less) content. It is responsiveness data which is 
mission dependent and requirements driven. These features change rarely or slowly and 
include lines of communication consisting of transportation networks (road, railway, 
pipeline, air and waterway), communications networks and power distribution networks. 

5.6  
Local Mission Specific Data (Local MSD)  
High density local coverage of focused areas used to meet specific geospatial 
requirements. Local MSD has more densification and greater detail than regional data 
(more feature classes, attributes, and attribute values). It is responsiveness data, which 
has mission dependent requirements and is usually time-sensitive. It is generally used for 
planning and operations of a tactical nature. The level of detail is sufficient for infantry 
and reconnaissance units to navigate in various environments. 

5.7  
Urban Mission Specific Data (Urban MSD)  
Very high density local coverage of focused areas used to meet specific geospatial 
requirements. Used for special operations and disaster relief. Urban data encompasses 
greater detail (density, accuracy, and resolution), or additional features and/or attributes 



OGC 07-027r1 

4 Copyright © 2007 Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 
 

to meet greater operation requirements. It is a responsiveness data, which is mission 
dependent, requirements-driven, and usually time-sensitive. 

5.8  
National System for Geospatial Intelligence Feature Catalog (NFC) 
The National System for Geospatial Intelligence Feature Catalog (NFC) is a collection of 
GEOINT feature and attribute requirements as determined by NSG partners. The NFC 
serves as the Logical Data Model (LDM) from which specific data content can be 
physically implemented. The data content outlined in Mission Specific Data conforms to 
the latest version of the NFC. 

5.9  
GEOINT Structure Implementation Profile (GSIP) 
Defines the methods for identifying and encoding Geospatial Intelligence (GEOINT) data 
in the National System for Geospatial Intelligence (NSG). The GSIP integrates the 
conceptual schemas from the ISO TC211 191xx series of standards for modeling. The 
GSIP also draws on the relevant content standards, specifications and profiles from the 
Digital Geospatial Information Working Group (DGIWG), International Hydrographic 
Organization (IHO), International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), as well as others 
with the intent to unify multiple domain-specific content models. 

6 Symbols (and abbreviated terms) 

ISO International Organization for Standardisation 

OGC Open Geospatial Consortium 

GML Geography Markup Language 

UML Unified Modeling Language 

XML eXtended Markup Language 

NGA National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency 

MSD Mission Specific Data  

WGS World Geodetic System 

FACC Feature Attribute Coding Catalog 

DFDD DGIWG Feature Data Dictionary 

NFDD NSG Feature Data Dictionary 

NSG National System for Geospatial-Intelligence 



OGC 07-027r1 

Copyright © 2007 Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  5
 

NSG FC NSG Feature Catalog 

WFS Web Feature Service 

7 Overview  

Mission Specific Data (MSD) provides the required geospatial detail (at the needed 
density/resolution and accuracy) and features and/or attributes to meet specialized 
mission needs. MSD can be of many types – to include elevation data, imagery, or vector 
features. 
Local Mission Specific Data (MSD) is extracted to support high-density local coverage 
of focused areas used to meet specific geospatial requirements. Local MSD has more 
densification and greater detail than regional data (more feature classes, attributes, and 
attribute values). It is responsiveness data, which has mission dependent requirements 
and is usually time-sensitive. It is generally used for planning and operations of a tactical 
nature. The level of detail is sufficient for infantry and reconnaissance units to navigate 
in various environments. 
Local MSD is equivalent in data content to what was formerly known as MSD3. It is 
equivalent to the content of 1:50K and 1:100K products including Harbor / Approach / 
Coastal Charts. While the scale and content correlates to current Topographic Line Map 
(TLM) products, they are not a one-for-one match. Local MSD will utilize data from 
existing NGA data stores. Local MSD contains three themes that consist of aeronautical 
data pulled from the Aeronautical Digital Data Environment (ADDE); topographic data 
pulled from the Geospatial Intelligence Feature Database (GIFD); hydrographic data 
pulled from Digital Navigation Chart (DNC) products. All three are compiled separately, 
then deconflated, and merged. 
The exact feature, attribute and geometry requirements for a Local MSD extraction are 
mission specific. However, the framework for all MSD levels is defined as part of the 
National System for Geospatial-Intelligence Feature Catalog (NFC) version 1.8. The data 
stores used as source for data collection do not represent the latest version of the NFC 
that defines Local MSD therefore mapping tables are created to transform existing data 
structures to NFC-compliant data. 
Local MSD is not to be used for navigation purposes, but supports navigation, mission 
planning, initial preparation of the battlefield (IPB), etc. 

8 Formal data product specification 

8.1 General remark 

This clause contains a description of the Local MSD Data Content Specification based on 
the formal structure of ISO 19131. 



OGC 07-027r1 

6 Copyright © 2007 Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 
 

8.2 Specification scope 

In principle, a data content specification may not be homogeneous across the whole data 
content, but may vary for different parts of the data. Given that Local MSD extraction is a 
user driven requirement not all Local MSD data collections will contain exactly the same 
features, and/or attributes. For Local MSD, however, the same specification scope applies 
to all parts of the data content specification that are described in the subsequent 
subclauses. 

Scope identification local_msd 

Level Dataset 

Level name not applicable 

Extent not applicable (scope is the full dataset) 

Level description not applicable 

Coverages not applicable (scope is the full dataset) 

8.3 Data product identification 

The information items in this subclause are used to identify a Local MSD data product. 

Title Local Mission Specific Data  

Abstract High-density local coverage of focused areas used to meet 
specific user driven geospatial requirements. Greater 
densification and detail than Regional MSD (more feature 
classes, attributes, and attribute values). It is responsiveness 
data, which has mission dependent requirements and is 
usually time-sensitive. It is generally used for planning and 
operations of a tactical nature.  

Topic categories - biota  

- boundaries  

- climatologyMeteorologyAtmosphere  

- economy  

- elevation  

- environment  



OGC 07-027r1 

Copyright © 2007 Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  7
 

- farming  

- geoscientificInformation  

- health  

- imageryBaseMapsEarthCover  

- inlandWaters  

- intelligenceMilitary  

- location  

- oceans  

- planningCadastre  

- society  

- structure  

- transportation  

- utilitiesCommunication 

Geographic description The geographic area covered by Local MSD extractions will 
vary from dataset to dataset. 

Alternate title Local MSD 

Purpose Responsiveness data, which has mission dependent 
requirements and is usually time-sensitive. It is generally 
used for planning and operations of a tactical nature. 

Spatial representation type vector  

Spatial resolution 1:50,000 to 1:100,000 

Supplemental information not applicable 

8.4 Data content and structure 

Local MSD is a feature-based product. Content information is described in terms of an 
application schema and a feature catalog.  

An overview of the Local MSD feature types, their properties (attributes and association 
roles) and their grouping into packages is included as Annex A. 



OGC 07-027r1 

8 Copyright © 2007 Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 
 

The process of creating the application schema and feature catalog consists of the 
following steps which are described in detail in the document “GSIP Schema Processing 
IPR (OGC 07-028)”: 

- The Local MSD feature catalog is a subset of the National System for Geospatial-
Intelligence Feature Catalog (NFC).  

- The content of the NFC plus information which subset of the NFC belongs to Local 
MSD (or other data content specifications) as well as other information relevant for 
the automatic generation of a Local MSD application schema is represented in the 
GEOINT Structure Implementation Profile (GSIP). 

- A Visual Basic script developed by NGA is used to automatically create a Local 
MSD ISO 19109 Application Schema in UML from the GSIP. The UML model is a 
Rational Rose model. 

- The UML model is exported from Rational Rose as a XMI 1.0 file (XMI provides a 
vendor independent XML encoding of a UML model). 

- Using the open source ShapeChange tool (http://www.interactive-
instruments.de/ugas/) for UML-to-GML-Application-Schema conversions (UGAS), a 
GML 3.2.1 application schema is derived automatically from the XMI file. The tool 
documentation includes one document describing the mapping rules from UML to 
GML application schemas as implemented by the tool. A second document describes 
the implementation of the ShapeChange tool, its installation and guidelines for using 
the tool. 

The GML application schema also includes DDMS 1.3 metadata about the feature 
types and property types defined in the application schema. 

 

Application schema The application schema provides the formal description of 
the data structure and content. It is a conceptual model, 
described using UML as the conceptual schema language in 
accordance with ISO 19109 (Geographic information — 
Rules for Application Schemas) and ISO/TS 19103 
(Geographic information — Conceptual Schema Language). 
 
The Local MSD application schema can be obtained as a 
Rational Rose UML model at the URL of the GEOINT 
Structure Implementation Profile (GSIP), see clause 4.  
 

Feature catalog The feature catalog provides the semantics of all feature 
types, together with their attributes and attribute value 
domains and association types between feature types 
contained in the application schema. The feature catalog is 



OGC 07-027r1 

Copyright © 2007 Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  9
 

realized in accordance with ISO 19110 (Geographic 
information — Methodology for feature cataloguing) 
and is encoded as a Microsoft Excel Workbook.  

The feature types, attribute types and attribute value domains 
are derived from the NSG Feature Data Dictionary (NFDD). 
The NFDD is based on the DGIWG Feature Data Dictionary 
(DFDD) with some national extensions. 

The Local MSD feature catalogue can be obtained as an 
Excel workbook at the URL of the GEOINT Structure 
Implementation Profile (GSIP), see clause 4.  
 
A tabular overview of the Local MSD feature types and their 
properties is included as Annex A. 

 

Local MSD also provides a loose grouping mechanism, called“Views”. There are 
currently 94 views defined in Local MSD. Information entities, in particular feature 
types, are associated with one or more views, and those views are organized into groups. 
Entity views are provided as a means to organize subsets of the NSG FC for the purposes 
of inspecting "similar entities". 

Views are also encoded as DDMS metadata elements which can be registered and 
published in a registry. This allows clients to discover them and use them, for example, to 
create queries of all features that are part of that view. 

NOTE Views are NOT "coverages" in the sense of coverages in existing FACC based data product specifications 
and do not in any manner affect the content of the NSG FC. 

The views are listed in Annex B. 

8.5 Reference systems  

Reference systems used in Local MSD data provide a reference frame for spatial and 
temporal coordinate values. 

Spatial reference system The use of WGS84 geographic coordinates for horizontal 
coordinates and Mean Sea Level (MSL) for vertical 
coordinates is mandated. 

Temporal reference system Gregorian calendar 

 

For attribute values that are associated with a unit of measure, the unit of measure is 
specified in the documentation of the respective attribute.  



OGC 07-027r1 

10 Copyright © 2007 Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 
 

8.6 Data quality  

Local MSD datasets have to meet the data quality requirements as described in this 
subclause. The data quality requirements for the three “themes” of data source that make 
up Local MSD, aeronautical, topographic and hydrographic are defined and verified 
during the data collection phase of these three individual themes. These requirements are 
defined by the respective production elements. The data quality requirements for Local 
MSD following the data deconfliction and merging are described in accordance with ISO 
19113 (Geographic information - Quality principles) and include a statement on 
acceptable conformance quality levels defined by the mission specific user requirements. 
The data conformance to these mission specific quality requirements will be reported 
based on adherance to the data quality measures as defined in ISO 19114 (Geographic 
information — Quality evaluation procedures) and ISO/TS 19138 (Geographic 
information - Data quality measures). 
 
Metadata reporting of data quality for Local MSD will be done in accordance with the 
ISO documents described above. Reporting will be done for only those data quality 
measures where measurements are actually completed and will be based on the user-
defined set of quality requirements for the mission specific extraction. This DCS does not 
attempt to define the acceptable values for data quality, but rather defines the mechanism 
for reporting the results. 

A formal definition of data quality information is given in ISO/DIS 19131 Annex E.4, 
which provides a UML model and the corresponding data definitions. 

An absolute horizontal positional accuracy for Local MSD feature data has been 
established as 23 Meters Circular Error. No linear positional accuracy requirement has 
been predefined for Local MSD. However, user defined requirements may identify an 
alternative acceptable positional accuracy. Local MSD extractions will report on the 
positional accuracy of the feature data in conformance with ISO 19115 metadata and 
measured in conformance with ISO/TS 19138 data quality measures. 

Regional MSD requirements include the ability to support network analysis. Local MSD 
being a densification of a Regional MSD is therefore expected to also support network 
analysis. Given this requirement an evaluation of the data content to support topology is 
necessary. ISO 19138 Data Quality Measures provides guidelines on topological 
consitency measures, examples 1 and 2 below describe measures to evaluate connectivity 
requirements.  

EXAMPLE 1 

Name number of missing connections due to undershoots 

Alternative name Undershoots 

Data quality element  logical consistency 



OGC 07-027r1 

Data quality subelement topological consistency 

Data quality basic measure error count 

Definition count of items in the dataset, within the parameter tolerance, 
that are mismatched due to undershoots 

Description  

Parameter search distance from the end of a dangling line 

Data quality value type integer 

Data quality value 
structure 

 

Source reference  

Example                          Road 

 

 

                        Road 

Measure identifier 23 

Search 
Tolerance = 3 

 
 
EXAMPLE 2 
 
Name number of missing connections due to overshoots 

Alternative name overshoots 

Data quality element  logical consistency 

Data quality subelement topological consistency 

Data quality basic measure error count 

Definition count of items in the dataset, within the parameter tolerance, 
that are mismatched due to overshoots 

Description  

Parameter search distance from the end of a dangling line 

Copyright © 2007 Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  11
 



OGC 07-027r1 

Data quality value type integer 

Data quality value 
structure 

 

Source reference  

Example                          Road 

 

 

                        Road 

Measure identifier 24 

Search 
Tolerance = 3 

 

While no absolute horizontal or linear positional accuracy requirement has been 
predefined for Local MSD, user defined requirements will likely identify a minimum 
acceptable positional accuracy.  However, Local MSD extractions will report on the 
positional accuaracy of the data regardless of an established requirement. Reporting of 
positional accuracy will be in conformance with ISO 19115 metadata and measured in 
conformance with ISO/TS 19138 data quality measures. 

 

EXAMPLE 3 

Name 
 

absolute circular error at 90% significance level of biased 
data 

Alternative name 
 

ACE 
 

Data quality element 
 

Positional Accuracy 
 

Data quality subelement 
 

Absolute or External Accuracy 
 

Data quality basic measure 
 

Not Applicable 
 

Definition 
 

The absolute horizontal accuracy of the data’s coordinates, 
expressed in terms of circular error at 90% probability given 
that a 
bias is present. 
 

Description 
 

A comparison of the data (source) and the control 
(reference) is 

12 Copyright © 2007 Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 
 



OGC 07-027r1 

calculated in the following manner: 
1. Calculate the absolute error in the horizontal dimension 

at each point: 

( ) ( )2 iiii referenceYsourceYreferenceXsourceXHi −+−=∆
     for i = 1 … N 

2. Calculate the mean horizontal error: 

( )
N

H i
H

∑∆=µ  

3. Calculate the standard deviation of the horizontal errors: 

( )
( )1

2

−
−∆

= ∑ N
H Hi

H
µσ  

4. Calculate the ratio of the absolute value of the mean 
error to the standard deviation: 

HHratio σµ /=  

5. If ratio > 1.4, then 2815.1=k  

6. If 4 . 1 ≤ ratio , then calculate k, the ratio of the mean to 
the 
standard deviation, using a cubic polynomial fit through the 
tabular values as defined in the CRC Handbook of Tables for
Probability and Statistics 
 

 
( ) ( )

( )3
2

282533.0
923237.0999556.06435.1

ratio
ratioratiok

×

−×+×−=
 

7. Compute CE90 for the source:  

( )HHsource kCE σµ ×+=90  

8. Compute absolute CE90: 

22 909090 sourcereferenceabs CECECE +=  
Parameter 
 

Sample size: minimum of 30 points is normally used but 
may not always be possible depending on identifiable 
control points. For feature level attribution sample 10% of 

Copyright © 2007 Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  13
 



OGC 07-027r1 

14 Copyright © 2007 Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 
 

the feature population. 
 

Data quality value type 
 

Measure 
 

Data quality value 
structure 
 

– 
 

Source reference 
 

1. Department of Defense: Standard Practice: Mapping, 
Charting and Geodesy Accuracy: MIL-STD-600001: dated 
26 February 1990. (U.S.) 
2. CRC Handbook of Tables for Probability and Statistics, 
second edition, 1966, 1968, International Standard Book No. 
0-87819-692-7 
 

Example 
 

– 
 

Measure identifier 
 

49 
 

 

EXAMPLE 4 

Name 
 

absolute linear error at 90% significance level of biased 
vertical data 
 

Alternative name 
 

ALE 
 

Data quality element 
 

Positional Accuracy 
 

Data quality subelement 
 

Absolute or External Accuracy 
 

Data quality basic measure 
 

Not Applicable 
 

Definition 
 

The absolute vertical accuracy of the data’s coordinates, 
expressed in terms of linear error at 90% probability given 
that a bias is present. 
 

Description 
 

A comparison of the data (source) and the control 
(reference) is 
calculated in the following manner: 
1. Calculate the absolute error in the vertical dimension at 

each point: 

 



OGC 07-027r1 

iii controlVdataVV −=∆           for i = 1 … N 

2. Calculate the mean vertical error: 

∑
=

=
N

i
iVN

V
1

1 δδ  

3. Calculate the standard deviation of the vertical errors: 

∑
=

−
−

=
N

i
iV VVN 1

2)(
1

1 δδσ  

4. Calculate the ratio of the absolute value of the mean 
error to the standard deviation: 

VVratio σµ /=  

5. If ratio > 1.4, then 2815.1=k  

Else

 
( ) ( )

( )3
2

282533.0
923237.0999556.06435.1

ratio
ratioratiok

×

−×+×−=
 

6. Compute LE90 for the data layer:  

( )VVdata kLE σµ ×+=90  

7. Compute absolute LE90: 

22 909090 controldataabs LELELE +=  
Parameter 
 

Sample size: minimum of 30 points is normally used but 
may not always be possible depending on identifiable 
control points. For feature level attribution sample 10% of 
the feature population. 
 

Data quality value type 
 

Measure 
 

Data quality value 
structure 
 

– 
 

Source reference 
 

1. Department of Defense: Standard Practice: Mapping, 
Charting and Geodesy Accuracy: MIL-STD-600001: dated 
26 February 1990. (U.S.) 

Copyright © 2007 Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  15
 



OGC 07-027r1 

16 Copyright © 2007 Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 
 

2. CRC Handbook of Tables for Probability and Statistics, 
second edition, 1966, 1968, International Standard Book No. 
0-87819-692-7 
 

Example 
 

– 
 

Measure identifier 
 

51 
 

 

8.7 Data capture  

Local MSD will utilize data from existing NGA data stores. Local MSD contains three 
themes that consist of aeronautical data pulled from the Aeronautical Digital Data 
Environment (ADDE); topographic data pulled from the Geospatial-Intelligence Feature 
Database (GIFD); hydrographic data pulled from Digital Navigation Chart (DNC) 
products. All three are compiled separately, then deconflated, and merged. 

Local MSD will then be densified to meet specific user-defined geospatial requirements. 

Rules for densified data capture for Local MSD for calendar year 2007 extraction are 
defined in the Digital Feature Extraction Guide (DFEG). The DFEG is created with the 
intent to support both contract and in-house near term production requirement. The 
DFEG is based on the NGA Profile of FACC. Mapping tables from FACC to the NSG 
Feature Catalog will be required. Beginning in calendar year 2008 extraction guidance 
will be based on the NSG Feature Extraction Guide (NFEG). This document will be 
based upon the NSG Feature Catalog and no data mapping will be required. Both of these 
documents support the collection of digital data and population of a product-neutral 
database.  

8.8 Data maintenance  

There is no predescribed maintenance cycle identified for mission specific data. 

However, the NGA Foundation-Based Operations Strategic Implementation Plan which 
provides an assessment of NGA’s ability to enable GEOINT by reviewing the key 
enablers of technology, metrics, corporate communication, governance, processes, 
standards, and workforce development clearly identifies a need for a data maintenance 
strategy. Development of a coordinated production strategy for NGA that encompasses a 
repeatable business process for developing agency data production and maintenance 
plans (i.e.annual and multi-year plans) is required. 

8.9 Portrayal 

A number of options exist for portrayal of feature data through OGC compliant web 



OGC 07-027r1 

Copyright © 2007 Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  17
 

services. These services are described in the documents listed below. Additionally, the 
Digital Geospatial Information Working Group (DGIWG) has a dedicated project team 
working the issues of symbology and portrayal. 

OGC 02-070, Styled Layer Descriptor (SLD) Implementation Specification 

OGC 05-077, Symbology Encoding Implementation Specification 

OGC 06-042, Web Mapping Service Implementation Specification 

OGC 05-110, Feature Portrayal Service Discussion Paper 

OGC 05-123, DGIWG Portrayal Application Schema 

OGC 06-140, OWS-4 Feature Styling IPR 

OGC 05-078r3, SLD profile of WMS 

8.10 Data product delivery  

This document specifies the rules for data delivery of Local MSD using GML 3.2.1 as an 
encoding and Web Feature Service (WFS) as a service interface. 

NOTE 1 In the future, additional delivery formats may be added to this document, e.g. ESRI Shapefile, ESRI 
Personal Geodatabase, other relational database output, WMS layers based on portrayal rules, etc.  

This delivery mechanism targets the on-demand use of up-to-date information from the 
GKB-F or other online-accessible data repositories in cases where network connection is 
available.  

The Local MSD GML Application Schema is a GML application schema according to 
GML 3.2.1 and is further described in Annex C. 

The Web Feature Service version that currently supports GML 3.2.1 is WFS 1.2 (ISO/CD 
19142). 

 

Delivery medium information  

Units of delivery Feature (with associated information entities) 

Transfer size not applicable 

Medium name Online via Web Feature Service 1.2 (ISO/CD 19142) 

The following additional requirements apply: 

- Web Feature Services that only deliver data shall support 



OGC 07-027r1 

18 Copyright © 2007 Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 
 

the Basic Xlink WFS profile. The use of Xlinks shall be 
limited to links within the dataset. 

- Web Feature Services that have to receive updated data 
shall support the Transactional Xlink WFS profile. The 
use of Xlinks shall be limited to links within the dataset. 

- HTTP POST shall be supported for all operations. 

NOTE: It is expected that support for HTTP SOAP will 
be a future requirement. 

- All HTTP conection shall use HTTPS. 

- Every property that has a GML object as its value that is 
not a feature shall have the object embedded inline. The 
only exception is when an object occurs multiple times in 
an XML document when the first occurance shall be 
embedded inline and the other instances shall be 
referenced using a bare name Xpointer referencing the 
gml:id value in the same document (e.g., 
xlink:href="#fe_132"). Note that this approach has been 
taken due to limitations in the Web Feature Services 
which only provides limited support for objects that are 
not features. 

- Every property that has a feature as its value shall not 
embed the feature inline, but used a xlink:href reference. 

- The DescribeFeatureType operation shall maintain all 
annotations as currently included in the GML application 
schema. 

NOTE: More detailed requirements, e.g. on minimum filter 
capabilities, may be added at a later time. 

Other delivery information not applicable 

 

Delivery format information  

Format name Local MSD GML Application Schema 

Version 1.0 

Specification The Local MSD GML Application Schema is described in 
Annex C.



OGC 07-027r1 

Copyright © 2007 Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  19
 

Annex C. 

File structure not applicable 

Language English 

Character Set utf8 

 

The general rules how the conceptual application schema in UML is mapped to the GML 
Application Schema is specified in the document “GSIP Schema Processing”. 

8.11 Additional information  

8.11.1 General remarks 

This subclause includes any other aspects of Local MSD data not provided elsewhere in 
this document. 

8.11.2 Security classification of data 

The information contained in Local MSD datasets varies in classification depending on 
the geographic location and collection requirements of the data. The classification for 
every feature or feature property that is not UNCLASSIFIED is attached as feature level 
metadata to the respective data element. 

8.11.3 Registers/registries 

Information that is imporant to interpret the data is maintained in registers and which may 
be made online accessible through an OGC Catalogue Service according to the ebXML 
RIM Application Profile or a website that provides the GML dictionary for download. 
This includes 

- CRS register: The coordinate reference system is referenced from data using a unique 
identifier. The CRS registry contains a full description of every coordinate reference 
system that may be used in Local MSD data.  

If coordinate reference systems are used that are contained in the EPSG register then 
these can be referenced using URNs in the OGC namespace using the guidance in 
OGC document 06-023r1, Definition identifier URNs in OGC namespace version 
1.1.0, http://portal.opengeospatial.org/files/?artifact_id=16339). Similarly, if other 
organizations like DGIWG set up such a CRS register, then the coordinate reference 
systems registered there can be used as well. 

- Units register: Units of measurements are referenced from data using a unique 
identifier. The units registry contains a full description of every unit that may be used 



OGC 07-027r1 

20 Copyright © 2007 Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 
 

in Local MSD data. 

The same comment made for coordinate reference systems and registers maintained 
by third parties applies to units as well. 

- NSG Feature Catalog: In some delivery formats, data elements may be encoded using 
shortnames or codes that are defined in the NSG Feature Catalog. This may be done 
due to limitations of the delivery format (i.e. character limitations in current GIS 
software) or to reduce the size of encoded data. In this case, it is required to access the 
contents of the NSG Feature Catalog to understand the meaning of a particular data 
item, for example, the meaning of a code of an enumerant in a coded attribute value 
domain. 

- GSIP View registry: Views do not have an impact on the Local MSD application 
schema or any Local MSD dataset. However, views are useful to provide user friendly 
access to MSD data. MSD data includes a larger number of feature types and views 
allow access to groups of feature types based on categories. This involves accessing 
views from a registry in order to compile WFS queries that select feature based on 
views.  

As this applies to all GSIP-based data content specifications in the same way, more 
detailed information is provided in the document “GSIP Schema Processing”. 

8.12 Metadata  

There are three levels of metadata required to support a fully operational GML encoded 
Local MSD.  

First there are metadata requirements that support the discovery and retrival of GML 
application schemas. The Local MSD GML application schema includes elements that 
conform to the DoD Discovery Metadata Specification (DDMS) version 1.3. The 
metadata elements are specified in the GEOINT Structure Implementation Profile 
Schema Processing IPR (OGC document 07-028). 

Local MSD also implements metadata at the dataset and feature levels. These metadata 
shall be implemented in conformance with ISO 19115 and ISO/TS 19139.  

All data delivery of Local MSD data (through a WFS or otherwise) shall include the 
appropriate dataset and feature level discovery metadata encoded according to ISO/TS 
19139. 



OGC 07-027r1 

Copyright © 2007 Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  21
 

Annex A 
 

9 Annex: List and definitions of feature types and properties 

The definitions of the Local MSD feature types and the properties as well as the object 
and data types representing the property values are documented in the XML documents 
included with this document. The XML documents are associated with stylesheets that 
support browsing the documents using a web browser (e.g., Internet Explorer version 6 or 
7, Firefox version 2). 

The root document is "index.lmsd.definitions.xml". For every type (feature, object or data 
type) in the application schema, one document is provided (4239 documents in total) 
defining the type in detail.  

In addition, schema metadata based on the DDMS 1.3 specification and as specified in 
the GEOINT Structure Implementation Profile Schema Processing IPR (07-028) is 
provided in the document "LMSD.xsd.ddms.xml". 

 



OGC 07-027r1 

22 Copyright © 2007 Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 
 

Annex B 
 

10 Annex: Views 

Table of view groups and views to be added (will be generated directly from GSIP) 



OGC 07-027r1 

Copyright © 2007 Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  23
 

Annex C 
 

11 Annex: Local MSD GML Application Schema 

The Local MSD GML Application Schema is organised into 20 XML Schema 
documents: 

Schema document Definition/description 

LMSD.xsd  GSIP Local MSD: This application schema defines the conceptual model 
for identifying and encoding Local GEOINT Mission Specific Data (MSD) 
in the U.S. National System for Geospatial-Intelligence (NSG). 

NOTE It specifically addresses selected ISO standards for modeling 
features and surfaces (coverages), drawing on relevant military standards, 
specifications and profiles established by the Digital Geospatial 
Information Working Group (DGIWG). 

This is the root schema document of the application schema that shall be 
referenced from any Local MSD GML document in its schemaLocation 
attribute. This schema document contains no schema components itself but 
includes all the other schema documents below. 

gsipAerodrome.xsd Aerodrome: Information about an area specifically designed and 
constructed for landing, accommodating, and launching military or civilian 
aircraft. 

gsipAeronauticalAtn.xsd Aeronautical Aids to Navigation: Denote all of the various electronic 
components of equipment, housing, and utilities that provide positional 
information for direction or assisting the navigation of airborne aircraft. 

NOTE Aids to Navigation are found at airfields and in other locations 
along the air routes. Aids to Navigation are also called NAVAIDS. 

gsipAgricultural.xsd Agricultural: Agriculture includes all activities and man-made features 
involved in the raising of crops and animals, for food and non-food 
purposes. 

gsipBoundaries.xsd Boundaries: Natural or artificial division between two areas. 

gsipCultural.xsd Cultural: Features on the landscape that have been constructed by man. 

NOTE Excepted are the groups 'Transportation', 'Ports and Harbours', 
'Population', and their related features. 

gsipDatatypes.xsd Datatypes: Datatypes that are either basic types or that are used by multiple 
packages. 

gsipElevation.xsd Elevation: Elements that show the vertical distance above or below a 
datum (the height above or below a specific reference point). 



OGC 07-027r1 

24 Copyright © 2007 Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 
 

gsipGeodesyGeophysics.xsd Geodesy and Geophysics: Pertaining to geophysical properties of the 
Earth. 

gsipHydrographicAtn.xsd Hydrographic Aids to Navigation: Any device external to a vessel intended 
to be of assistance to a navigator. 

NOTE Assistance that is provided will aid in the determination of 
position, charting safe courses, or provide a warning to dangers or 
obstructions to navigation. 

gsipInformation.xsd Information: Abstract and/or non-feature modeling entities. 

EXAMPLE Metadata and information collections. 

gsipInlandWater.xsd Inland Water: Inland hydrography includes those natural (both fresh and 
saline) or manmade features, of which water is constituent part and which 
fall within the landside limits of the mean high water shoreline. 

gsipMaritimeLimits.xsd Maritime Limits: An area or route defining the extent of a safe passage for 
vessels or where certain activities or factors of significance to navigation 
and/or operation apply. 

gsipMilitaryStructures.xsd Military Installations and Defensive Structures: Military areas and support 
facilities and structures used to prevent or resist enemy attacks. 

gsipOceanEnvironment.xsd Ocean Environment: Ocean Environment deals with the location and 
nature of the shorelines of the world's oceans and the characteristics of the 
area seaward of the shoreline to include manmade or natural features 
which could be hazards to navigation. 

gsipPhysiography.xsd Physiography: The natural features of the Earth's surface as well as their 
formations. 

EXAMPLE Snow and ice regions, landforms and exposed surface 
materials. 

gsipPopulation.xsd Population: A concentration of structures and buildings serving as 
dwellings or zones of occupancy and usually in conjunction with a well 
defined road or street pattern.  

NOTE The term applies to developed areas where more than one family 
or family group lives as a community. 

gsipPortsHarbours.xsd Ports and Harbours: Ports are settlements with installations for handling 
waterborne shipping. Harbours are areas where the anchorage and shore 
are protected from the sea and storms by natural or man-made barriers.  

NOTE Areas that do not have this protection but, are still suitable for 
vessel anchorage are called open anchorages or roadsteads. A good harbor 
must have deep water, adequate protection from storms, enough space to 
accommodate large numbers of vessel, and a shoreline that can be 
developed as a port and as a site for industry. Harbors may be situated on 
the sea, estuaries, or inland lakes and rivers. 



OGC 07-027r1 

Copyright © 2007 Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc. All Rights Reserved.  25
 

gsipTransportation.xsd  Transportation: Principal means of overland movement of people and 
goods from one location to another.  

EXAMPLE Roads, railroads, bridges and associated features. 

gsipVegetation.xsd Vegetation: The vegetation view refers to the various types of plant life or 
lack thereof indigenous to an area.  

 

The XML Schema documents are provided with this document; they can also be accessed 
at  

 http://www.nga.mil/portal/site/ng01/standards/schemas  

The Local MSD GML Application Schema conforms to the following conformance 
classes of GML 3.2.1: 

- "All GML application schemas" 

- "GML application schemas converted from an ISO 19109 Application Schema in 
UML" 

- "GML application schemas defining Features and Feature Collections"  

The GML profile used by the Local MSD GML Application Schema is shared by all 
GSIP-based GML application schemas and is specified in the document “GEOINT 
Structure Implementation Profile Schema Processing IPR”. The GML profile conforms to 
the following conformance classes of GML 3.2.1: 

- "All GML profiles" 

- "Geometric primitives (Spatial) – 0-dimensional" 

- "Geometric primitives (Spatial) – 0/1-dimensional" 

Both the curve interpolation types linear and arc3Points are used by elements of the profile and have to be 
supported by implementations. 

- "Geometric primitives (Spatial) – 0/1/2-dimensional" 

- "Geometric complexes (Spatial) – 0/1-dimensional" 

- "Geometric complexes (Spatial) – 0/1/2-dimensional" 

Implementations processing Local MSD data encoded in GML shall conform to the 
following conformance clauses from GML 3.2.1: 

- "All software implementations" 

Clemens Portele
The URL may change.



OGC 07-027r1 

26 Copyright © 2007 Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 
 

- "Support for remote simple Xlinks" 

- "Support for nillable properties" 

- "Support for units of measurement" 

- "Metadata properties" 

- "Support for GML profiles in instance validation" 

- "Writing GML" (if the implementation is intended to write Local MSD data) 

- "Reading GML" (if the implementation is intended to read Local MSD data) 

In addition, the GML profile supported by such implementations shall be a superset of 
the NSG GML profile. 


	Scope
	Security classification of specification
	Conformance
	Normative references
	Terms and definitions
	Symbols (and abbreviated terms)
	Overview
	Formal data product specification
	General remark
	Specification scope
	Data product identification
	Data content and structure
	Reference systems
	Data quality
	Data capture
	Data maintenance
	Portrayal
	Data product delivery
	Additional information
	General remarks
	Security classification of data
	Registers/registries

	Metadata

	Annex: List and definitions of feature types and properties
	Annex: Views
	Annex: Local MSD GML Application Schema

