
Network Working Group                                            C. Reed 

Request For Comment: 5165                     Open Geospatial Consortium 

Category: Standards Track                                     April 2008 

                                                                 

            A Uniform Resource Name (URN) namespace for the  

                    Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) 

                       

 

Status of this Memo 

 

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for the 

   Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions for 

   improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the "Internet 

   Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the standardization state 

   and status of this protocol.  Distribution of this memo is unlimited. 

 

    

 

Copyright Notice 

 

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007). 

 

Abstract 

 

   This document describes a Uniform Resource Name (URN) namespace that 

   is engineered by the Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) for naming 

   persistent resources published by the OGC.  The formal  

   Namespace IDentifier (NID) is "ogc". 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1. Introduction 

 

   The Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) is a voluntary consensus  

   standards organization. Founded in 1994, the OGC produces  

   many kinds of technical documents, including: standards, working  

   drafts, technical reports, discussion papers, and XML schemas.  

   The OGC wishes to provide persistent, location-independent  

   Identifiers for these resources. Further, a number of OGC standards 

   and application schemas of OGC standards are now used and/or 

   referenced by standards specifications from other standards  

   organizations, including OASIS, the IETF, IEEE, ISO, and OMA. 



Reed            Standards Track                   [Page 1] 

RFC 5156          A URN namespace for the OGC                  April 2008 

    

   The OGC core mission is to develop spatial interface and encoding 

   specifications that are openly available and royalty free. Products  

   and services that conform to OGC interface specifications enable users 

   to freely exchange and process spatial information across networks, 

   computing platforms, and products.  Interoperability in such an 

   environment is facilitated by the use of a system of persistent 

   identifiers that are global in scope. The OGC is the only standards 

   organization whose mission is specifically focused in interfaces 

   and encodings for geospatial content and services. 

 

   Motivated by these concerns, the OGC would like to assign formal  

   URNs to published resources in order to provide persistent,  

   location-independent identifiers for them. The process for  

   registering a namespace identifier is documented in RFC 3406 [2]. 

 

   The official IANA registry of URN namespaces is available online: 

   <http://www.iana.org/assignments/urn-namespaces>. 

 

2. URN Specification for "ogc" NID 

 

   Namespace ID: 

 

      The NID "ogc" is requested. 

 

   Registration Information: 

 

      Registration Version Number: 1 

      Registration Date: 2007-08-16 

 

   Declared registrant of the namespace: 

 

      Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc. (Headquarters) 

      35 Main Street, Suite 5 

      Wayland, MA 01778-5037, USA 

      c/o Carl Reed (creed@opengeospatial.org) 

 

   Declaration of syntactic structure: 

 

      The Namespace Specific String (NSS) of all URNs that use the "ogc" 

      NID will have the following structure: 

 

         urn:ogc:{OGCresource}:{ResourceSpecificString} 

 

      where the "OGCresource" is a US-ASCII string that conforms to the 

      URN syntax requirements [RFC2141] and defines a specific class of 

      resource type.  Each resource type has a specific labeling scheme 

      that is covered by "ResourceSpecificString", which also conforms 

      to the naming requirements of [RFC2141]. The only exception is that 

      the character ":" shall not be used as part of the "OGCResource" 

      string. This is to avoid possible confusion. Further, "OGCResource" 

      is case sensitive. 

 



Reed                       Standards Track                       [Page 2] 

RFC 5165             A URN namespace for the OGC                April 2008 

       

      The OGC maintains a naming authority, the OGC Naming Authority 

      (ONA), that will manage the assignment of  "OGCresources" and the 

      specific registration values assigned for each resource class.  

 

   Relevant ancillary documentation: 

 

      The OGC Naming Authority (ONA) provides information on the 

      registered resources and the registrations for each. More 

information  

      about ONA and the registration activities and procedures to be  

      followed are available at: 

 

      http://www.opengeospatial.org/ogcUrnPolicy 

 

      An operational OGC URN "resolver" is available at  

      http://urn.opengis.net/. The resolver provides a registry  

      of the currently member approved OGC URN's used in currently 

approved 

      and implemented OGC standards.  

 

      The OGC Naming Authority is a permanent OGC resource. The documents 

      and related OGC URN resources, such as the URN resolver, have 

      stable URLs. ONA reference is http://www.opengeospatial.org/ogcna. 

       

      There are a number of OGC Best Practice and Standards documents 

      that define member agreements on the definitions for OGCresource and  

      ResourceSpecificString. 

 

   Identifier uniqueness considerations: 

 

      The ONA manages resources using the "ogc" NID and will be the 

      authority for managing the resources and subsequent strings 

      associated.  In the associated procedures, ONA will ensure the 

      uniqueness of the strings themselves or shall permit secondary 

      responsibility for management of well-defined sub-trees. 

 

    Identifier persistence considerations: 

 

      The OGC provides clear documentation on a number of the  

      registered uses of the "ogc" NID.  Additional uses developed 

      by the OGC membership in the future will be first approved by 

      the ONA and then by the entire OGC voting membership. This is the 

      normal process for all OGC documents that become OGC standards or 

      other permanent resources for use by the community. 

 

      The OGC Naming Authority maintains a permanent registry of  

      approved uses. This resource is structured such that each 

OGCresource 

      has a separate description and registration table.  

 

      The registration tables and information are published and 

      maintained by ONA on the OGC web site. The OGC will not  



Reed                        Standards Track                      [Page 3] 

RFC 5165               A URN namespace for the OGC             April 2008         

       

      de-register URN registrations, and not to change an entry's  

      meaning in an incompatible way 

  

    Process of identifier assignment: 

 

      ONA uses the approved OGC standards policies and procedures for 

      discussion, approval and registration of each type of resource  

      maintained [3]. 

 

      Each such resource may have three types of registration activities: 

 

         1) Registered values associated with OGC specs or services 

         2) Registration of values or sub-trees to other entities 

 

    Process for identifier resolution: 

 

      The namespace is not listed with a Resolution Discovery System 

      (RDS); this is not relevant. 

 

    Rules for Lexical Equivalence: 

 

      No special considerations except as noted in the declaration 

      of syntactic structure; the rules for lexical equivalence of 

      RFC 2141 [1] apply. 

 

    Conformance with URN Syntax: 

 

      No special considerations. 

 

    Validation mechanism: 

 

      None specified.  URN assignment will be handled by procedures 

      implemented in support of ONA activities. 

 

   Scope: 

 

      Global 

 

3. Examples 

 

      The following examples are representative urns that have been  

      assigned by the ONA. 

          

          urn:ogc:specification:gml:doc-is(02-023r4):3.0.0  

 

      Defines the urn to be used to identify version 3.0.0 of an OGC 

      specification document for the Geography Markup Language in the OGC 

      document archives. 

          

         urn:ogc:serviceType:CatalogueService:2.0.2:HTTP  

          

      Defines the urn to be used for an application to specify the  



Reed                       Standards Track                        [Page 4] 

RFC 5165              A URN namespace for the OGC               April 2008 

 

      specific service type for an OGC Catalogue service. 

 

         urn:ogc:def:crs:EPSG:6.3:26986 

 

      This is the URN literal to reference the definition of the 

Coordinate 

      Reference System (CRS) with code 26986 that is specified in 

      version 6.3 of the EPSG database [4]. 

 

4. Namespace Considerations: 

 

   There is currently no available namespace that will allow the OGC 

   to uniquely specify and access resources, such as schemas and 

   registries, that are required by organizations implementing OGC 

   standards. There is also a need for other standards organizations, 

   such as OASIS and the IETF, to be able to access OGC specific 

   resources. 

     

   The geospatial and location services industry will benefit  

   from publication of this namespace by having more permanent and  

   reliable names for the XML namespaces, schema locations, standards 

   document reference, and other document artifacts required for 

   implementation of an OGC standard.  

 

   The OGC members considered use of other existing NIDs, such as 

   those for OASIS and OMA. However, the semantics for geospatial 

   content and services have a number of unique characteristics, 

   such as the expression of coordinate reference systems. The URN 

   syntax used by OASIS and OMA do not support the necessary  

   elements to express the full semantics used in and by the geospatial 

   community. 

 

5. Community Considerations 

       

   Both the traditional geospatial and location services  

   industry as well as the broader IT community will benefit  

   from publication of this namespace by providing permanent and  

   reliable names for the XML namespaces, schema locations, catalogues 

   registries, and other document artifacts required for 

   implementation of an OGC standard.  

 

   We desire these resources to be freely and openly available  

   as a set of community resources. Not only can OGC members identify 

   and submit new proposals for additional resources. So can any 

   individual or organization can make a contribution by submitting 

   a proposal to the OGC for consideration by the ONA. Normal OGC 

   standards discussion and approval processes will be used to process 

   any new community contribution.  

 

   Since 2003, the OGC membership has been developing expertise in  

   using the OGC URN. The knowledge and experience gained through  

   implementation experiments and a variety of operational test beds 



Reed                        Standards Track                     [Page 5] 

RFC 5165               A URN namespace for the OGC            April 2008 

 

 

   contributed to the current OGC URN specification. The knowledge is  

   documented in OGC documents (above) as well as an operational 

   OGC URN resolver. Work is also underway on a publicly accessible 

   OGC URN registry. These resources are necessary for a number of 

   reasons, including the fact that numerous agencies and  

   organization, such as NATO and NGA, have mandated procurement 

   policy that requiring OGC standards and their related OGC URNs. 

 

 

6. Security Considerations 

 

   There are no additional security considerations other than those 

   normally associated with the use and resolution of URNs in general. 

 

7. IANA Considerations 

 

   This document defines a URN NID registration of "ogc", which has 

   been entered into the IANA registry located at 

   <http://www.iana.org/assignments/urn-namespaces>. 

 

8. Normative References 

 

   [1] Moats, R., "URN Syntax", RFC 2141, May 1997. Available [online]: 

   <http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2141.txt> 

       

   [2] Daigle, L. et al., "Uniform Resource Names (URN) Namespace  

   Definition Mechanisms", RFC 3406, October 2002. Available [online]:  

   http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3406.txt 

 

   [3] OGC Technical Committee Policies and Procedures, Version 3, 

   October 1, 2007. Available [online]: 

   https://portal.opengeospatial.org/files/?artifact_id=12586 

 

   [4] "Definition identifier URNs in OGC namespace" Version 1.1 

   Arliss Whiteside, An OGC Best Practices, August 2006. Available 

   [online]: 

   http://portal.opengeospatial.org/files/?artifact_id=16339 

           

   Author Address 

 

   Carl Reed, PhD 

   Chief Technology Officer 

   Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc. 

   35 Main Street, Suite 5 

   Wayland, MA 01778-5037, USA 

   Email:   creed@opengeospatial.org 

 

 

 

 

 



Reed                        Standards Track                    [Page 6] 

RFC 5165               A URN namespace for the OGC           April 2008 

 

Full Copyright Statement 

 

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007). 

  

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 

   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 

   retain all their rights. 

 

   This document and the information contained herein 

   are provided on an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE 

   ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE 

   INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING  

   TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING 

   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 

   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 

   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 

 

Intellectual Property 

 

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 

   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 

   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 

   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 

   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 

   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information 

   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 

   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 

 

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 

   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 

   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 

   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 

   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 

 

    http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 

 

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 

   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 

   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 

   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at 

   ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 

 

Acknowledgement(s) 

   Thanks to Jon Peterson, Leslie Daigle, Allison Mankin, Simon Cox, 

   Clemens Portele, Doug Nebert, Steven Keens, Josh Lieberman and  

   Arliss Whiteside for their review and comments. Thanks to Ted Hardie 

   Brian Rosen, Allison Mankin, and Lisa Dusseault for helping me  

   with the IETF document process. Thanks to Peter Saint-Andre, 

   Stefan Santesson, Alfred Hines, Joel Halpern and others for their  

   Reviews and comments on this document. 

 


