
O 

 

12 July 2012 1 Copyright© 2012 Open Geospatial Consortium 

 
 

Open Geospatial Consortium 

Approval Date: 2012-06-22 

Publication date: 2012-07-12 

Reference number of this document: OGC 09-044r3 

Category: OGC
® 

White Paper 

Co-Editors:      

Thierry Badard 

Matthew Kadillak 

George Percivall 

Steven Ramage 

Carl Reed 

Michael Sanderson  

Raj Singh 

Jayant Sharma 

Luc Vaillancourt 

 

OGC White Paper 

Geospatial Business Intelligence (GeoBI) 

Copyright © 2012 Open Geospatial Consortium 

To obtain additional rights of use, visit http://www.opengeospatial.org/legal/. 

Warning 

 

This document is not an OGC Standard. This document is an OGC White Paper and is therefore 

not an official position of the OGC membership. This paper is distributed for review and 

comment. This document is subject to change without notice and may not be referred to as an 

OGC Standard. Further, an OGC White Paper should not be referenced as required or mandatory 

technology in procurements. 

Document type: OGC
®
 White Paper 

Document subtype: White Paper 

Document stage: Approved for Public Release  

Document language: English 

http://www.opengeospatial.org/legal/


O 

 

12 July 2012 2 Copyright© 2012 Open Geospatial Consortium 

 

Attention is drawn to the possibility that some of the elements of this document may be the 

subject of patent rights. The Open Geospatial Consortium shall not be held responsible for 

identifying any or all such patent rights. 

Recipients of this document are requested to submit, with their comments, notification of any 

relevant patent claims or other intellectual property rights of which they may be aware that 

might be infringed by any implementation of the standard set forth in this document, and to 

provide supporting documentation.  



O 

 

12 July 2012 3 Copyright© 2012 Open Geospatial Consortium 

Table of Contents 

 

GeoBI White Paper and OGC contact points ................................................................................................................. 4 

Forward ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4 

Introduction—Why BI needs standards to incorporate location data .............................................................. 5 

An introduction to Business Intelligence .................................................................................................................. 6 

Business users of geospatial information ................................................................................................................. 6 

How GeoBI is developing in the OGC........................................................................................................................... 7 

GeoBi Opportunities ............................................................................................................................................................... 8 

Location in business information ................................................................................................................................. 8 

Location in ETL ......................................................................................................................................................................... 9 

Information models .......................................................................................................................................................... 10 

Actions ................................................................................................................................................................................... 11 

Location in OLAP/OLTP ...................................................................................................................................................... 11 

Information Models .......................................................................................................................................................... 12 

OLAP / OLTP Starting Point .......................................................................................................................................... 12 

Actions ................................................................................................................................................................................... 13 

Location in Reporting .......................................................................................................................................................... 14 

Reporting Start Point: Exchangeable Information Models .............................................................................. 14 

Actions ................................................................................................................................................................................... 15 

Next steps for GeoBI in OGC .............................................................................................................................................. 16 

Your participation ................................................................................................................................................................. 16 

Appendix 1 –A BI market primer from a GIS perspective ................................................................................ 17 

Appendix 2 GLOSSARY OF BI TERMS ....................................................................................................................... 19 

Appendix 3: Other Potential OGC standards .......................................................................................................... 22 

  



O 

 

12 July 2012 4 Copyright© 2012 Open Geospatial Consortium 

GEOBI WHITE PAPER AND OGC CONTACT POINTS 

Any questions regarding this document should be directed to the editor or any the following 
contributors:  

CONTACT COMPANY E-Mail ADDRESS 

Raj Singh, Co-Editor OGC rsingh <at> opengeospatial.org 

George Percivall, Co-Editor OGC gpercivall <at> opengeospatial.org 

Carl Reed OGC creed <at> opengeospatial.org 

Mark Reichardt OGC mreichardt <at> opengeospatial.org 

 

FORWARD 

This white paper provides an assessment of the how OGC standards can be applied and extended to 
increase the use of geospatial information in the multi-faceted area of Business Intelligence (BI). 

Attention is drawn to the possibility that some of the elements of this document may be the subject of 
patent rights. The Open Geospatial Consortium shall not be held responsible for identifying any or all 
such patent rights. 

Recipients of this document are requested to submit, with their comments, notification of any relevant 
patent claims or other intellectual property rights of which they may be aware that might be infringed 
by any implementation of the standard set forth in this document, and to provide supporting 
documentation. 

 

 

 

  

mailto:gpercivall@opengeospatial.org
mailto:creed@opengeospatial.org
mailto:mreichardt@opengeospatial.org


O 

 

12 July 2012 5 Copyright© 2012 Open Geospatial Consortium 

INTRODUCTION—WHY BI NEEDS STANDARDS TO INCORPORATE LOCATION DATA 

BI is an umbrella term for a major component of IT infrastructure. It encompasses Data 
Warehouses, Business Analytics, Dashboards and Scorecards.  This IT infrastructure is associated 
with C-level decision-making in an organization. These decision-making tools have typically 
included location as a dumb attribute (coded sales zones as opposed to sales zones as geographic 
boundaries). At this point in the BI lifecycle, customers are looking to derive additional business 
benefit / return on investment from intelligent location data; data discovery and unstructured data.  

The BI market bears many resemblances to the GIS market. Early proprietary growth and some 
standards work on query has given way to market consolidation (see Appendix 1 for a summary as 
seen through the geospatial lense). Gartner (2011a)1 says that the BI market is now at risk of 
creating fragmented silos of data, definitions and tools. This description would resonate with many 
OGC members.  IDS and Directions Magazine originally2 and more recently Gartner (2011a)3 has 
sensed now is the appropriate time for location to introduced to the BI space and specifically cited 
OGC as a key actor in this activity. Accordingly the OGC Board of Directors has identified Geospatial 
Business Intelligence (GeoBI) as a major focus area for OGC standards related activities.  Increasing 
the uptake of OGC standards in the location intelligence marketplace and re-invigorating the 
standards initiatives within the business intelligence market can be a basis for improved decision 
making and opportunities for the broader use of products that are implemented using OGC 
standards.   

This White Paper describes the value, methods and technology for applying geospatial 
interoperability standards to business intelligence technology through the addition of location as an 
intelligent dimension.  It concludes with recommendations for next steps. 

  

                                                             

1 Gartner Magic Quadrant for Business Intelligence Platforms (Rita L. Sallam, James Richardson, John Hagerty, Bill 
Hostmann) January 2011. 

2 Embodied in the Location Intelligence Conferences 

3 Gartner Analyst,  Andreas Bitterer speaking at the BI Summit, London 2011 stated that only a small number BI 
implementations can answer the ‘where’ question 



O 

 

12 July 2012 6 Copyright© 2012 Open Geospatial Consortium 

 

An introduction to Business Intelligence 

This introduction is based on a geospatial viewpoint. It is part of OGC outreach and the OGC 
welcomes correction from the BI community. 

Business intelligence (BI) aims to support better business decision-making. It mainly refers to 
computer-based techniques for identifying, extracting and analyzing business data, such as sales 
revenue by products and/or departments or by associated costs and incomes. These data are in 
functional applications typically at too fine a level of granularity for C-level executives.  They are 
therefore abstracted using ETL tools into a data warehouse. This involves IT departments leading 
business modeling activities to provide supporting ontologies. 

BI technologies provide historical, current and predictive views of business operations. Common 
functions of business intelligence technologies are reporting, dashboarding, scoreboarding, online 
analytical processing (OLAP), data mining, process mining, business performance management 
analytics and predictive analytics. OLAP is a category of decision support tools often used to 
provide access, in an efficient and intuitive manner, to a data warehouse or “datamart.” The de facto 
OLAP user interface is Excel (if nothing else is available then financial teams can create their own 
spreadsheet models). OLAP is a multi-dimensional concept where time is a key dimension.  
Location is an additional dimension. The user interface that includes a location dimension needs to 
give the users (C-level executives) the ability to manipulate boundaries easily to re-query data 
based on outliers. 

BI’s objective is to apply skills, knowledge, technologies, applications, quality, risks, security issues 
and practices to help a business acquire a better understanding of market behavior and commercial 
context. To achieve these objectives, BI applications undertake the collection, integration, analysis, 
interpretation and presentation of business information. By extension, "business intelligence" may 
refer to the collected information itself or the explicit knowledge developed from the information.4  
The purpose of business intelligence—a term that dates at least to 1958—is to support better 
business decision making. Thus, BI is also described as a decision support system (DSS). 

Standards work has been conducted in the BI space. In 2001 the now defunct XMLA Advisory 
Council produced an XML SOAP specification for data access across the web. This included mdXML 
as the query language based on underlying ability to query multi-dimensional databases. This work 
was taken up by the open source community and this has resulted in Mondrian.  

BI in geographically dispersed businesses invariably involves supply chain management as 
efficiencies are sought. If intelligent location is to play a role in BI then models of business 
processes and related ontologies that are used by supply chain professionals need to be 
considered5. A glossary of terms is included in Appendix 2. 

Business users of geospatial information 

Traditional geospatial technology has focused on spatial data management and processing.  GIS and 
image processing software products provide powerful techniques for dealing with geospatial data 
while retaining a geospatial-centric focus.  With the advent of the web, the use of geospatial data 

                                                             

4http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Business_intelligence 

5 See http://supply-chain.org/about 

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Business_intelligence


O 

 

12 July 2012 7 Copyright© 2012 Open Geospatial Consortium 

becomes an enabler for many mass-market applications.  Web mapping and location based services 
(LBS) are examples of this recent trend.  

In the traditional GIS market, users of the geospatial software are professionally trained and tasked 
to work with the geospatial-centric products that require special expertise.  In contrast, 
consumer—or mass-market —users are not trained on geospatial data and processing and are 
typically performing simple tasks. Between those extremes are professionals that implicitly use, or 
could use geospatial information for business tasks (See Figure 1). 

 

 

Figure 1 - Beyond Traditional GIS/Imagery and Mass Markets6 

How GeoBI is developing in the OGC 

The work focus of the OGC has followed a similar pattern.  In 1994, the original OGC activity focus 
was on traditional GIS data interoperability and then shortly after that, the emphasis was 
increasingly on imagery. In 1998, the OGC members recognized the trend toward the Web as the 
dominant medium for interoperability. OGC published its first documents on OGC Web Services7 in 
that and the following year, and began development of a broader family of interface standards for 
geospatial web services.  

Although business market requirements have not been an explicit emphasis for the work of the 
OGC, the standards established by OGC have been applied to business applications.  The OGC Simple 
Features Access (SFA) Encoding Standard provides interoperability for geospatial features using 
SQL—the query language of databases that serve the business market.  The OGC’s Web Map Service 
(WMS), Web Feature Service (WFS) and Web Coverage Service (WCS) interface standards provide 
access to geospatial information based upon service-oriented architecture—a main method for 
internet-based business.   

In 2005, OGC began work on the Web Processing Service (WPS) Interface Standard—an interface 
that allows any computational process to be exposed as a Web service—thereby adding a focus on 

                                                             

6Figure published in Imaging Notes, Fall 2008 - http://www.imagingnotes.com/go/ 

7 http://portal.opengeospatial.org/files/?artifact_id=723, 
http://portal.opengeospatial.org/files/?artifact_id=559&version=1, 
http://portal.opengeospatial.org/files/?artifact_id=14973&version=1&format=pdf  

http://portal.opengeospatial.org/files/?artifact_id=723
http://portal.opengeospatial.org/files/?artifact_id=559&version=1
http://portal.opengeospatial.org/files/?artifact_id=14973&version=1&format=pdf


O 

 

12 July 2012 8 Copyright© 2012 Open Geospatial Consortium 

online analysis and geoprocessing to OGC’s traditional data access and query standards. Also in 
2005, the OGC Mass Market working group was established to address the market swing to web-
based and LBS consumer applications. However, OGC standards for business users are not as far 
along. While WPS provides a framework for online analysis, it is silent regarding the specific 
computational processes any particular domain, such as business intelligence, should implement. A 
key objective of this white paper is to characterize this “missing middle” and to define a path to 
apply the OGC’s technology to serve this critical market.  We must begin with an understanding of 
the existing Business Intelligence market.   

 “The best chance for enterprises to widely adopt geospatial or location intelligence applications is 
through BI, which is already widely used.”8 

The remainder of this white paper will emphasize how GeoBI can build upon the existing OGC 
standards and activities that provide access to geospatial data for business uses. In part, the use of 
existing standards for GeoBI can be understood through a review of OGC marketing and 
communications materials. However, more can be done to place the existing OGC standards in a BI 
framework, and additional standards are needed. Further discussion of OGC standards can be found 
in Appendix 3.  

GEOBI OPPORTUNITIES 

Location in business information 

From a geospatial perspective we see three components to the BI landscape, shown in Figure 7. 

At the ETL stage, location in business information can occur in many forms ranging from a word 
with implicit geographic meaning (Paris) to explicit coordinates defining a location in a 
mathematical fashion (latitude-longitude coordinates).  

At the OLAP/OLTP stage, when data is ready to be analyzed, these human-centric terms must be 
translated into geometry to support efficient data processing such as aggregation, statistical 
analysis, and computational modeling.  

Finally, at the reporting and visualization stage, a different model of location information may be 
appropriate to take into account the focus shift from data processing to display. 

The following sections of this paper present work that has been done by the OGC on geospatial 
standards for information analysis interoperability from the perspective of the above three 
components of the BI space: ETL, OLAP/OLTP, and Applications/Reporting. While this report 
details a number of standards that can be immediately applied to the BI marketplace and details 
further standards in Appendix 3, it should not be seen as an exhaustive listing. There is still much 
work to be done to fully achieve the potential benefits to consumers and producers of BI systems. 
To this end each section contains a list of potential follow on actions. 

                                                             

8 http://www.thegeofactor.com/category/business-intelligence/ 



O 

 

12 July 2012 9 Copyright© 2012 Open Geospatial Consortium 

 

Figure 2: Main Components of a BI System: ETL, OLAP/OLTP, and Reporting9 

 

 

LOCATION IN ETL 

 

At the ETL level, location in business information can occur in many 
forms ranging from a word with implicit geographic meaning 
(Paris) to explicit coordinates defining a location in a mathematical 
fashion (latitude-longitude coordinates). Geospatial standards build 
on these concepts of location. The most detailed standards provide definitions of geometry, 
describing physical objects such as buildings, town boundaries, sales territories, voting districts, 
rainfall patterns, hurricane paths, etc. While physical geometry is a requirement for spatial analysis, 
businesses rarely maintain location as a geometric object in transactional databases. Rather they 
store the more abstract, human friendly description of location—an address, a zip code, or a town 
name.  

So, the processing of location in data stored into the data warehouse at the ETL stage is difficult to 
accomplish in a uniform manner. Most countries maintain some level of de facto standards for 
various types of location such as addresses, town names, zip codes, census tracts, etc., but although 
many international standardization activities are underway, a clear consensus has yet to emerge. 
Therefore, integrating location data at the ETL stage will continue to be a relatively costly, bespoke 
process until these standardization activities occur. Companies who spend heavily on ETL would be 
well served by investment in standardizing the processing of addresses internationally. 

Another important topic for standardization is units of measure. One must know, for example, 
whether a statistic is households per acre or households per square meter, or whether another 
statistic is income per capita or income per household. Especially in a time when more and more 
data sets will be accessed through third party web services, being explicit and clear to users about 
how numbers were derived is crucial. 

                                                             

9 Source: JMAP Spatial OLAP – On-Line Analytical Processing for Spatial Databases – Innovative technology to support 
intuitive and interactive exploration and analysis of spatio-temporal multidimensional data, KHEOPS Technologies, 2005, 
http://www.oifii.org/do-org/dod/geosoa-scg-ulaval-ca_kheops-tech-com_jmap-solap_WP_JMap_SOLAP.pdf 



O 

 

12 July 2012 10 Copyright© 2012 Open Geospatial Consortium 

OGC standards dealing with web services that allow interoperable access to metadata, data or 
processes are therefore of great interest for GeoBI applications and should be supported by spatial 
ETL tools. Such tools provide access to an ever growing number of sources of possibly strategic 
information for companies or public bodies. 

Information models 

Geospatial information has one purpose: to communicate knowledge about things that have 
"where-ness." The knowledge imparted by the map answers two kinds of questions: "where" and 
"what." Maps can tell us where things are, both in relation to other nearby things and in relation to 
abstract coordinate systems. Maps also can tell us what things are, either through symbology (e.g., 
by use of color or line pattern whose meaning is explained in a legend) or through text or tabular 
annotations or multi-media links. The same applies to attributes that modify or extend our 
knowledge of things. 

There are many different ways to create digital representations of geospatial information. This 
richness of alternatives is more a curse than a blessing since it has created the confusing and 
apparently chaotic variety of Geographic Information System (GIS) data structures and formats 
confronting users. Part of the value a GeoBI vendor brings to a customer is the vendor's ability to 
make sense out of this chaos. We see this in the considerable attention paid to ETL in the value 
chain of both geospatial and BI software. However, the market should employ information 
standards as much as possible, so that resources currently devoted to making sense out of disparate 
data can be redirected to analysis and reporting.  

This section recommends some starting points for standardizing the representation of geographic 
information within the BI community Other potential avenues are included in Appendix 3.  

ETL Starting Point: Geography: OGC Simple Feature Access Encoding Standard  

http://www.opengeospatial.org/standards/sfa 

The quantum of geographic information is the feature. A feature object (in software) corresponds to 
a real world or abstract entity. Attributes of (that is, attributes either contained in or associated to) 
this feature object describe measurable or describable phenomena about this entity. Unlike a data 
structure description, feature object instances derive their semantics and valid use or analysis from 
the corresponding real world entities’ meaning. Using the concept of reference systems, attribute 
primitives such as geographically registered geometry are tied to the real world. Once located, 
feature objects are then decorated in a controlled manner with attributes. The OGC Simple Feature 
Access Standard specifies a common storage model of geographical data (point, line, polygon, multi-
point, multi-line, etc.) using well-known text (or binary). 

Addressing 

While there is not a single international standard for addressing, there are standards for encoding 
addresses. Two examples are the OASIS Customer Information Quality (CIQ) xAL10 (extensible 
addressing standard), which is used in the OGC KML standard, and the Internet VCard RFC11. 
Currently, ISO TC 211 is working on an international address content model standard that is based 
on the numerous, often related, national standards for addresses. It may be appropriate for the BI 
community to use GeoNames in RDF form. 

                                                             

10 http://www.oasis-open.org/committees/tc_home.php?wg_abbrev=ciq 

11 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/VCard 

http://www.opengeospatial.org/standards/sfa
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Well-known_text


O 

 

12 July 2012 11 Copyright© 2012 Open Geospatial Consortium 

Administrative Divisions 

In general, standardization on administrative divisions occurs on the national level. This is 
adequate for most business intelligence applications, as analysis usually does not occur across 
country boundaries. In the US, for example, the national standards of zip codes, towns, counties and 
states work fine. And in other countries, similar divisions exist. However, in a place like Europe, 
multi-country analyses may be required. The European INSPIRE project has funded some academic 
work towards solving this issue.12  

At the global level, the UN is the international gatekeeper for administrative units and is the arbiter 
For disputes between nations on common administrative boundaries, if a truly global analysis is 
required, the UN can be a source of information.13 

Actions 

 Implement support for native spatial data storage in BI databases 

 Adopt geospatial data access standards in ETL systems 

 Develop ways to easily expose ETL processes as WPS services 

 Develop strategies for using table joining and synchronization to integrate geospatial data 

 Develop international standards for representing addresses and points of interest 

 Develop international standards for administrative divisions 

 Develop tighter relationships/support of the spatial component with “standards” stemming 
from the (geo)statistical domain (NetCDF, SDMX, …) 

 

LOCATION IN OLAP/OLTP  

 

OLAP, or online analytic processing, is the computational engine of 
business intelligence. All data pre-processing is designed to improve 
OLAP, and reporting is only as good as the OLAP’s computation. With 
today’s computational power, analysis doesn’t always require an OLAP 
engine to occur just-in-time, and so we increasingly see systems 
categorized as online transaction processing (OLTP). This trend in no way diminishes the 
importance of the analysis procedure, or its architectural role vis-à-vis standards.  

Accordingly, GeoBI’s worth is largely determined by the types of spatial analytics enabled by spatial 
data. What location adds to BI is the ability to segment data based on spatial patterns, and find 
patterns of spatial clustering or diffusion. This adds powerful insights into information patterns 
that cannot be obtained in any other fashion. 

                                                             

12 http://www.springerlink.com/content/b47mpjtl21j14786/ 

13 http://boundaries.ungiwg.org/ 



O 

 

12 July 2012 12 Copyright© 2012 Open Geospatial Consortium 

Information Models 

All interesting GeoBI analytics and visualizations are predicated upon the ability to process spatial 
data, and that requires the storage and maintenance of geospatial data in its native, computer-
centric form of points, lines and polygons. This must occur at some point in the OLAP pipeline before 
location can be part of any analysis. 

A point is simply an x,y coordinate. This is most commonly a latitude and longitude as seen in GPS 
coordinates and in popular mapping apps like Google Maps and Bing. A line strings together a set of 
x,y coordinates to describe a feature such as a road, flight path, or storm track. A polygon is a closed 
line, so that a finite space is defined, which can be useful to describe sales territories, demographic 
boundaries, or flood zones.  

 

 

Standards for storing data as points, lines and polygons 
are quite mature, as well as means of SQL query and 
representation of standardized descriptions of 
geography through “well-known text”. SQL (Structure 
Query Language) is an ISO standard for access to DBMS.  
SQL defines many data types including a spatial data 
type.14 See OGC’s work on Simple Feature Access15 for 
greater detail on these simple descriptions of location. 

 

OLAP / OLTP Starting Point 

OGC Web Processing Service 

http://www.opengeospatial.org/standards/wps 

The Web Processing Service (WPS) defines a standardized interface that facilitates the publishing of 
geospatial processes and the discovery of and binding to those processes by clients. Processes 
include any algorithm, calculation or model that operates on spatially referenced data. Publishing 
means making available machine-readable binding information as well as human- readable 
metadata that allows service discovery and use. 

The WPS provides mechanisms to identify the spatially referenced data required by the calculation, 
initiate the calculation, and manage the output from the calculation so that the client can access it. 

Recently, OGC members have embarked upon work to define a limited set of analytic algorithms 
that will comprise a statistical analysis “profile” of WPS. This is relevant to GeoBI because it will 
signal to the marketplace what analytic functions are most useful in web deployment. This profile of 
WPS addresses the following core areas of geospatial data analysis: 

 Geometric Basics 

 Aggregation 

                                                             

14http://www.iso.org/iso/iso_catalogue/catalogue_tc/catalogue_detail.htm?csnumber=45498 

15http://www.opengeospatial.org/standards/sfa 

http://www.opengeospatial.org/standards/wps
http://www.iso.org/iso/iso_catalogue/catalogue_tc/catalogue_detail.htm?csnumber=45498
http://www.opengeospatial.org/standards/sfa


O 

 

12 July 2012 13 Copyright© 2012 Open Geospatial Consortium 

 Proximity 

 Statistical Measures 

 Measures of Distribution 

 Measures of Similarity 

One convenient term coined for the combination of traditional OLAP and geospatial computation is 
Spatial OLAP, or SOLAP (see Figure 3). A SOLAP tool can be defined as “a visual platform built 
especially to support rapid and easy spatio-temporal analysis and exploration of data following a 
multidimensional approach comprised of aggregation levels available in cartographic displays as 
well as in tabular and diagram displays.”16 While the above statistical analysis profile of WPS should 
serve as a foundation, it may be too broad for GeoBI. A “SOLAP” profile of WPS should be a high 
priority for GeoBI standards setting. 

 

 

Figure 3—SOLAP17 

Actions 

At the OLAP level, when data is ready to be analyzed, human-centric terms like addresses must be 
translated into physical geometry to support efficient geospatial data processing such as 
aggregation, statistical analysis, and computational modeling.  

In order to enable not only the standard access to spatial data for SOLAP-based analytics but also 
the interoperable dissemination of analysis based on such systems, several actions are required. 

 Implement support for native and standard spatial data storage in databases used by OLAP 
systems. 

 Support standard modeling of the geospatial component inside OLAP systems, in a similar 
way to the one used for SQL. This includes the standardization of the Spatial MDX (or Geo-
MDX) extensions. 

 Develop WFS-like services for SOLAP data cubes in order to allow the dissemination of sub-
data cubes that could be used in other systems, e.g. mobile devices.18 

                                                             

16http://sirs.scg.ulaval.ca/Yvanbedard/article_nonprotege/400.pdf 

17 Source: JMAP Spatial OLAP – On-Line Analytical Processing for Spatial Databases – Innovative technology to support 
intuitive and interactive exploration and analysis of spatio-temporal multidimensional data, KHEOPS Technologies, 2005, 
http://www.oifii.org/do-org/dod/geosoa-scg-ulaval-ca_kheops-tech-com_jmap-solap_WP_JMap_SOLAP.pdf 

http://sirs.scg.ulaval.ca/Yvanbedard/article_nonprotege/400.pdf


O 

 

12 July 2012 14 Copyright© 2012 Open Geospatial Consortium 

 Develop WMS-like services for SOLAP data cubes, in order to easily and efficiently 
disseminate representations of geo-analytical data ready to be included in reports. 

 Develop a XML/GML based encoding for the exchange of SOLAP data cubes.  

 Adapt or develop standards, perhaps as ISO 19115/19139 profiles, for the modeling and 
encoding of SOLAP data cube metadata. 

 Develop a CSW profile for querying and delivery of metadata dealing with SOLAP data cube 

 Develop statistical processing standards to promote development of better reporting tools 

 

LOCATION IN REPORTING 

 

Traditional BI presents its results to decision makers in reports, or 
dashboards. Dashboards focus on user interfaces that portray 
analysis graphically in summary form ready to support decision-
making. They often also allow users to interact with data obtained 
from the OLAP tier of the data warehouse, pulling out different facets of information in charts, 
graphs, and text reports. 

GeoBI adds maps to this mix. There is a direct correlation to dashboards with geospatial capabilities 
that were developed largely for military uses. Much of their functionality has been adapted for the 
business world. In the military, these user interfaces often go by the term “decision support 
services” providing “situational awareness”.  

The geospatial domain has a rich tradition of analysis through visualization involving maps. And 
there is a rich standards baseline for dynamic map generation using information and analysis 
services. OGC has established a number of standards in this area, from describing how to describe 
the cartographic styling of a map, to listing the data sets shown on a map and how to symbolize raw 
data as a thematic map that tells a story offering insight into the data.  

Reporting Start Point: Exchangeable Information Models 

OGC KML Encoding Standard 

http://www.opengeospatial.org/standards/kml/ 

KML is an XML-based encoding schema for expressing geographic annotation and visualization on 
existing or future web-based online maps and Earth browsers (that includes not only the 
presentation of graphical data on the globe, but also the control of the user’s navigation in the sense 
of where to go and where to look).  

                                                                                                                                                                                                    

18 Some preliminary specifications of such encoding and services can be found in: 

 Etienne Dubé, Thierry Badard, Yvan Bédard: XML encoding and Web Services for Spatial OLAP data cube 
exchange: an SOA approach. CIT 17(4): 347-358 (2009) 

 Etienne Dubé, Thierry Badard, Yvan Bédard: Une architecture orientée service web pour la constitution de 
minicubes SOLAP pour clients mobiles. Revue Internationale de Géomatique 19(2): 211-230 (2009). 

http://www.opengeospatial.org/standards/kml/


O 

 

12 July 2012 15 Copyright© 2012 Open Geospatial Consortium 

OGC Styled Layer Descriptor and Symbology Encoding (SLD) Standard 

http://www.opengeospatial.org/standards/symbol 

http://www.opengeospatial.org/standards/sld 

OGC has defined an architecture for dynamic styling of geographic data so that attractive, 
persuasive, professional quality maps can be displayed in a services environment. Symbols for 
geographic features such as points, lines and polygons should be defined using the XML dialect 
defined in the Symbology Encoding specification. These may be stored in a symbology library. The 
Styled Layer Descriptor specification tells software developers how to take these symbols and apply 
them to data to create explanatory thematic maps. 

Actions 

 Promote support for WMS, WMTS and more map-based visualization in BI 

 Adapt SLD for complex thematic mapping based on OLTP and OLAP data structures 

 Further develop symbology sets and best practices for map visualization 

  

http://www.opengeospatial.org/standards/symbol
http://www.opengeospatial.org/standards/sld


O 

 

12 July 2012 16 Copyright© 2012 Open Geospatial Consortium 

NEXT STEPS FOR GEOBI IN OGC 

This GeoBI White Paper is an initial step toward increasing interoperable access to geospatial 
information in support of business decisions through the use of open standards.  This white paper 
outlines the use cases and initial architecture that can inform a standards development process for 
GeoBI. 

OGC invites other organizations to participate in this development.  GeoBI will depend upon a set of 
compatible standards so multiple standards developing organizations will be involved.  Effective 
standards development must involve the industry that develops software products that implement 
the standards.  Consumers of GeoBI—the persons making critical decisions based upon GeoBI—
must be involved in the definition of the standards in order for the overall enterprise to be effective. 

OGC invites additional participation in the consensus process and also invites technical queries 
related to new implementations of the emerging standards. 

YOUR PARTICIPATION 

Membership in OGC offers many benefits to both your organization and the larger geospatial 
community. We invite you to learn more. Contact:  info@opengeospatial.org.  

Visit the OGC website at http://www.opengeospatial.org.  

 

Copyright © 2011, Open Geospatial Consortium. OpenGIS® and OGC® are trademarks or registered trademarks of the Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc. in 
the United States and in other countries. All other products mentioned are registered trademarks or trademarks of their respective companies. Please send 
comments or report problems to: Webmaster@opengeospatial.org. 

 

 

  

mailto:info@opengeospatial.org
http://www.opengeospatial.org/


O 

 

12 July 2012 17 Copyright© 2012 Open Geospatial Consortium 

Appendix 1 –A BI market primer from a GIS perspective 

A 2009 Gartner Group paper predicted these developments in business intelligence/data 
warehousing market. ["Gartner Reveals Five Business Intelligence Predictions for 2009 and 
Beyond", http://www.gartner.com/it/page.jsp?id=856714]: 

• By 2013, due to a lack of information, processes, and tools more than 35 percent of the top 
5,000 global companies will regularly fail to make insightful decisions about significant changes in 
their business and markets. 

• By 2012, business units will control at least 40 percent of the total budget for business 
intelligence.[citation needed] 

• By 2010, 20 percent of organizations will have an industry-specific analytic application 
delivered via software as a service as a standard component of their business intelligence portfolio. 

• In 2009, collaborative decision-making will emerge as a new product category that 
combines social software with business intelligence platform capabilities. 

• By 2012, one-third of analytic applications applied to business processes will be delivered 
through coarse-grained application mashups. 

Business Intelligence Market Size 

The Business Intelligence software industry is growing at a fast pace. Here are numbers for this 
important segment of the IT industry, including BI Platform, Analytic Applications and Performance 
Management, but not including ETL ("extract, transform and load," or data integration): 

• Up 22% to 8.8 billion in 2008: http://www.gartner.com/it/page.jsp?id=1017812   

• Up 4.2% to 9.3 billion in 2009: http://www.gartner.com/it/page.jsp?id=1357514   

• Up 13.4% to 10.5 billion in 2010: http://www.gartner.com/it/page.jsp?id=1642714   

According to Gartner, “the market for BI platforms will remain one of the fastest growing software 
markets. Organizations continue to turn to BI as a vital tool for smarter, more agile and efficient 
business. The BI platform market's compound annual growth rate (CAGR) through 2014 is expected 
to be 7.0%.”  

Some of the best known commercial products include Microsoft SQL Server Analysis Services, 
Cognos Powerplay, MicroStrategy, Business Objects and Oracle OLAP, just to name a few. Several 
acquisitions in the Business Intelligence domain have occurred in the last few years 
(http://www.bi-verdict.com/fileadmin/FreeAnalyses/consolidations.htm). Some of the major 
acquisitions took place in 2007: 

• Oracle acquired Hyperion for $3.3B.  Hyperion adds complementary products to Oracle's 
business intelligence offerings including a leading open enterprise planning system, financial 
consolidation products, and a powerful multi-source OLAP server. 

• SAP acquired Business Objects for $6.8B.  SAP BusinessObjects offers a broad portfolio of 
tools and applications designed to optimize business performance by connecting people, 
information, and businesses across business networks. 

• IBM acquired Cognos for $5B 

 



O 

 

12 July 2012 18 Copyright© 2012 Open Geospatial Consortium 

Each of the above-mentioned BI product vendors has developed approaches for tightly integrating 
geospatial information with their BI products.  For example, Business Objects embeds geospatial 
data via ESRI and PBBI products. SAP offers a GIS Business Connector to ESRI and PBBI products.  
Oracle has built-in spatial capability.  Hyperion is integrated with ESRI products. 

The BI industry, as in any other segment of the IT industry, now includes new players with open 
source offerings like JasperSoft and Pentaho, or software-as-a-service offerings from Tableau and 
QlikView. 

This paper will describe existing OGC standards for exploiting geography, and opportunities for 
new standardization activities, within the traditional BI infrastructure (involving ETL and OLAP) 
and BI applications (Reporting, Dashboard, Data analysis and data mining). 

  



O 

 

12 July 2012 19 Copyright© 2012 Open Geospatial Consortium 

Appendix 2 GLOSSARY OF BI TERMS 

Before exploring the role of standards in geospatial in Business Intelligence, here is a brief 
summary of the common Business Intelligence components and end-user applications. 

ETL 

Extract, transform, and loading processes involve: extracting data from outside sources; 
transforming it to fit operational needs (which can include quality levels); and loading it into the 
end target (database or data warehouse). BI systems are optimized for speed, and therefore 
maintain data in unique, idiosyncratic and often proprietary formats. The raw data that feeds these 
systems are usually in a variety of structured and unstructured formats. And so therefore a key 
function of the BI system is to extract data from out in the wild and translate it into a usable format. 
If there is a useful data set that the system cannot handle, then the system is less powerful than it 
could otherwise be. 

OLAP/OLTP 

BI users generally have such great data volumes that analysis and decision support can only occur 
after the data size has been reduced or otherwise manipulated to increase the performance of 
queries and visualization. Various techniques for aggregation, data thinning, and intermediate 
statistics often lie at the heart of the analysis, or online analytic processing (OLAP) stage. OLAP 
often uses a multidimensional (“cube”) view of aggregate data to provide quick access to strategic 
information for further analysis.  

Increasingly, this data preparation stage can be skipped due to high computational and data 
transfer performance, or simply when BI methodologies are applied to smaller data sets. In this 
case, analysis is called online transaction processing (OLTP). 

BI on OLTP 

Definition of OLTP: Online transaction processing refers to a class of systems that facilitate and 
manage transaction-oriented applications, typically for data entry and retrieval transaction 
processing ("transaction" in the context of computer or database transactions). 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OLTP.  

BI Applications like Reporting, Dashboards and Data Mining can directly connect to and interact 
with databases or data warehouses that are stored in a RDBMS via a query language like SQL. They 
can also directly render information stored in different file formats. The data can remain in an 
operational/transactional system and/or, with the help of an ETL tool (see section 2.3 "Location in 
ETL" for definition) or ETL processes directly in the RRDBMS, the data can be extracted, maybe 
restructured and then stored in a central dedicated RDBMS data warehouse. This type of back-end 
infrastructure can be classified as OLTP. 

  

Figure 2: BI Applications from RDBMS/data warehouse (OLTP/SQL) 



O 

 

12 July 2012 20 Copyright© 2012 Open Geospatial Consortium 

BI on OLAP 

All the BI uniqueness and power can be available through applications like Reporting and 
Dashboard but also advanced data analysis (slide and dice with an OLAP-client end-user 
application) if the back-end infrastructure is OLAP ready. The raw data coming from different data 
sources & IT systems, probably of OLTP type, has to go through some transformations in order to fit 
the desired OLAP data model using an ETL tool. The transformed data is organized according 
dedicated data structures, named dimensional data structures (e.g. star or snowflake schemas) in a 
data warehouse that an OLAP server can access properly. The end-user BI applications then 
communicate to the OLAP server (list http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comparison_of_OLAP_Servers) 
with MDX queries (the query language used in many OLAP server implementations) to support the 
multidimensional potential of the data. 

  

Figure 3: BI applications from a full BI infrastructure (OLAP/MDX) 

Definition of OLAP: In computing, online analytical processing is an approach to swiftly answer 
multi-dimensional analytical queries (expressed in MDX). OLAP is part of the broader category of 
business intelligence, which also encompasses relational reporting and data mining. The term OLAP 
was created as a slight modification of the traditional database term OLTP (Online Transaction 
Processing). http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OLAP.  

Definition of OLAP (data) cube: An OLAP cube is a data structure that allows for fast analysis of 
data. So, the data cube is a notion that resides and exists in the OLAP server only. Talking about the 
data cube in a data warehouse is an abuse of the term. The OLAP server maps the dimensional 
concepts (dimensions, hierarchies, members, etc.) with structures that are stored in the data 
warehouse (dimension tables, fact tables, etc.). 

OLAP can also be defined as the capability of manipulating and analyzing data from multiple 
perspectives. The arrangement of data into cubes overcomes some limitations of relational 
databases. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OLAP_cube.  

Definition of MDX: Multidimensional Expressions (MDX) is a query language for OLAP databases, 
much like SQL is a query language for relational databases. It is also a calculation language, with 
syntax similar to spreadsheet formulas. 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MultiDimensional_eXpressions.  

It is also important to consider XML for Analysis (abbreviated as XMLA). XMLA is an industry 
standard for data access in analytical systems, such as OLAP and Data Mining. XMLA is based on 
other industry standards such as XML, SOAP and HTTP. XMLA is maintained by the XMLA Council. 
Microsoft, Hyperion and SAS are the founding members. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/XMLA. In 
brief, XMLA is a service-oriented protocol that allows applications to issue MDX queries to an OLAP 
system and to retrieve data in an interoperable way, as the result sets are encoded in XML. 



O 

 

12 July 2012 21 Copyright© 2012 Open Geospatial Consortium 

BI Applications and Reporting 

Results from OLAP queries are often stored in a database optimized for reporting. Of course the key 
value BI provides is better decision making, which requires connecting analysis to a host of 
reporting tools that produce reports, charts, graphs, and in GeoBI, maps. These decision support 
tools usually also have a component of interactivity, allowing the decision maker control over the 
outputs.  

There are different types of end-users benefiting from BI Systems. Depending on their needs, level 
of expertise and technical skills, BI applications range from the simple reports shown in Figure 4 
(on-demand production of reports in different formats—PDF, Excel, etc.—from a dynamic data 
source); to more interactive dashboards (dynamic web-based applications displaying key 
operational/analytical data & performance indicator) in Figure 5; to powerful slice and dice data 
exploration/discovery and analysis (connected to an OLAP source) and predictive analytics & data 
mining shown in Figure 6.  

   

Figure 4: Examples of BI reports (source: http://www.pentaho.com/) 

 

  

Figure 5: Examples of web-based dashboards (source: http://www.pentaho.com/) 

  



O 

 

12 July 2012 22 Copyright© 2012 Open Geospatial Consortium 

 

Figure 6: Example of a Geo-Dashboard made with Oracle (source: http://oracle-
maps.blogspot.com/2011/02/oracle-maps-mit-adf-data-visualisation.html) 

Left overs 

The need for interoperability to connect geospatial information with business intelligence is 
explained by Johnston McLamb, a business intelligence firm:  

Until recently, Geospatial Business Intelligence implementations required substantial financial 
and time investments.  Geospatial information had to be maintained by a highly specialized 
geographical information system department and was segregated from the company's core 
information. Worse yet, this data was often owned by a vendor and was only available through 
that vendor’s proprietary application program interfaces (APIs).   

By moving spatial data from proprietary vendor databases to your own databases, we’re able to 
store your geospatial information according to open GIS standards. This co-located geospatial 
data is then available for real-time analysis with your existing enterprise data. This data can 
then seamlessly be integrated and used across the enterprise by reporting tools, applications, 
web services, and map viewers.  

 

Appendix 3: Other Potential OGC standards 

ETL 

GeoRSS 

http://georss.org 

GeoRSS is a community consensus standard and describes a number of ways to encode location in 
RSS feeds. GeoRSS-Simple supports basic geometries (point, line, box, polygon) and covers the 
typical use cases when encoding locations. GeoRSS-GML is a formal GML Application Profile and 
supports a greater range of features, notably coordinate reference systems other than WGS-84. 
Both formats are designed for use with Atom 1.0, RSS 2.0 and RSS 1.0. Services 

Computational services for ETL operations are at the heart of data interoperability, and as such 
many of the core OGC services for raw data provision are relevant.  



O 

 

12 July 2012 23 Copyright© 2012 Open Geospatial Consortium 

OGC Simple Features for SQL Interface Standard 

http://www.opengeospatial.org/standards/sfs 

In addition to the Simple Features data modeling specification described above, this OGC standard 
also defines a standard Structured Query Language (SQL) schema that supports storage, retrieval, 
query and update of feature collections via the SQL Call-Level Interface. In an SQL-implementation, 
a collection of features of a single type are stored as a "feature table" usually with some geometric 
valued attributes (columns). Each feature is primarily represented as a row in this feature table, 
and described by that and other tables logically linked to this base feature table using standard SQL 
techniques. The non-spatial attributes of features are mapped onto columns whose types are drawn 
from the set of SQL data types, potentially including SQL3 user defined types (UDT). The spatial 
attributes of features are mapped onto columns whose types are based on the geometric data types 
for SQL defined in this standard and its references. Feature-table schemas are described for two 
sorts of SQL-implementations: implementations based a more classical SQL relational model using 
only the SQL predefined data types and SQL with additional types for geometry. In any case, the 
geometric representations have a set of SQL accessible routines to support geometric behavior and 
query. 

OGC Web Feature Service 

http://www.opengeospatial.org/standards/wfs 

The Web Feature Service Interface Standard defines a simple interface to retrieve and update 
geospatial data encoded in an XML dialect called the OGC Geography Markup Language (GML) from 
multiple Web Feature Services. The WFS standard defines interfaces for data access and 
manipulation operations on geographic features, using HTTP. A Transactional WFS allows creation, 
deletion and updating of features in addition to querying and retrieval of features.  

OGC Filter Encoding  

http://www.opengeospatial.org/standards/filter 

The OGC Filter Encoding Standard (FES) defines an XML dialect for describing spatial database 
queries. A filter expression logically combines constraints on the properties of a feature in order to 
identify a particular subset of features to be operated upon. For example, a subset of features might 
be identified to render them in a particular color or convert them into a user-specified format. 
Constraints can be specified on values of spatial, temporal and scalar properties. An example of a 
filter is, “find all the properties in Olmstead County owned by Peter Vretanos.” This standard is used 
by a number of OGC Web Services, including the Web Feature Service, the Catalogue Service, and 
the Styled Layer Descriptor Standard. 

OGC Gazetteer Service Application Profile of the Web Feature Service  

http://portal.opengeospatial.org/files/?artifact_id=15529 

The OGC Gazetteer Service allows a client to search and retrieve elements of a geo-referenced 
vocabulary of well-known place-names. Instances within a collection of gazetteer features may be—
as the terms in a thesaurus—related to each other and constitute a hierarchical vocabulary of 
geographic places. 

OGC Sensor Observation Service 

http://www.opengeospatial.org/standards/sos 

The OGC Sensor Observation Service Interface Standard (SOS) provides an API for managing 
sensors and retrieving sensor data and specifically “observation” data. Whether from in-situ 



O 

 

12 July 2012 24 Copyright© 2012 Open Geospatial Consortium 

sensors (e.g., water monitoring) or dynamic sensors (e.g., satellite imaging), measurements made 
from sensor systems contribute most of the geospatial data by volume used in geospatial systems 
today. This is one of the OGC Sensor Web Enablement (SWE) 
[http://www.opengeospatial.org/ogc/markets-technologies/swe] suite of standards. 

Sensor data is not currently a common component of business intelligence data sources, but should 
become more prevalent as more sensors such as webcams, inventory control systems, traffic 
counting devices, etc. are deployed and made accessible through web services. 

OGC Table Joining Service Interface Standard 

http://www.opengeospatial.org/standards/tjs 

This OGC standard defines a simple way to describe and exchange tabular data that contains 
information about geographic objects. Almost all corporate databases contain some kind of 
geographic identifier, regardless of whether or not the database is housed in a computing 
environment that supports a Geographic Information System (GIS). Geographic identifiers can 
include postal codes, municipality names, telephone area codes, or more special purpose identifiers 
such as school districts. Geospatial linking technology allows this corporate data to be found and 
used for mapping or spatial analysis. 

The Table Joining Service offers a way to expose this corporate data to other computers, so that it 
can be found and accessed, and if offers a way to merge that data with the spatial data that 
describes the framework, in order to enable mapping or geospatial analysis. 

Geosynchronization—Current OGC standards activity 

http://portal.opengeospatial.org/files/?artifact_id=39476 

Agile data infrastructures that organizations deploy offer increasingly efficient networks capable of 
responding to dynamic requirements for using geospatial data.  In this context, data provider 
organizations are being called upon more often than before to deliver current, timely and verified 
geospatial data over the World Wide Web. In order to satisfy these requirements, data providers 
must collaborate with outside entities to collect new data and/or update their existing data 
holdings.  This may, for example, mean synchronizing their data with closest-to-source providers. 
This may also mean “crowd-sourcing” their data production or supporting disparate sources of in-
house, enterprise information sources. 

Regardless of the nature of the collaboration, there is a need for a service to mediate the interaction 
between data providers and outside entities acting as data collectors.  The service must support 
data entry with validation, notification of changes to interested parties and allow replication of the 
data provider's features. 

A Geosynchronization service sits between the provider's data store(s) and data collectors.  It 
allows data collectors to submit new data or make modifications to existing data without directly 
affecting the data in the provider's data store(s) until validation or transformation has been 
applied, thus ensuring that the quality and fitness for use of the data. 

 

Reporting Services 

OGC Web Map Context Encoding Standard 

http://www.opengeospatial.org/standards/wmc 



O 

 

12 July 2012 25 Copyright© 2012 Open Geospatial Consortium 

This specification states how a specific grouping maps can be described in a portable, platform-
independent format for storage in a repository or for transmission between clients. This 
description is known as a "Web Map Context Document," or simply a "Context." 

A Context Document includes information about the server(s) providing layer(s) in the overall map, 
the bounding box and map projection shared by all the maps, sufficient operational metadata for 
Client software to reproduce the map, and ancillary metadata used to annotate or describe the 
maps and their provenance for the benefit of human viewers. 

Services 

OGC Feature Portrayal Service Interface Standard 

http://portal.opengeospatial.org/files/?artifact_id=22364 

Symbology Encoding, mentioned above, describes the encoding for symbols for map features. 
Applying these symbols to spatial data coming from geographic information services is defined in 
the specification for a feature portrayal service. 

OGC Geographic Objects Interface Standard 

http://www.opengeospatial.org/standards/go 

TheGeographic Objects Interface Standard provides an open set of common, lightweight, language-
independent abstractions for describing, managing, rendering, and manipulating geometric and 
geographic objects within an application programming environment. It provides both an abstract 
object standard (in UML) and a programming-language-specific profile (in Java). The language-
specific bindings serve as an open Application Program Interface (API). 

OGC Web Map Service and OGC Web Map Tile Service interface standards 

http://www.opengeospatial.org/standards/wms 

http://www.opengeospatial.org/standards/wmts 

The Web Map Service Interface Standard (WMS) provides a simple HTTP interface for requesting 
geo-registered map images from one or more distributed geospatial databases. A WMS request 
defines the geographic layer(s) and area of interest to be processed. The response to the request is 
one or more geo-registered map images (returned as JPEG, PNG, etc.) that can be displayed in a 
browser application. The interface also supports the ability to specify whether the returned images 
should be transparent so that layers from multiple servers can be combined or not. 

Web Map Tile Service offers a complementary approach to WMS, focusing on fast serving of pre-
computed maps, constraining the bounding box and scales to discrete tiles. WMTS makes it easier 
to use performance strategies to improve scalability like caching, pre-rendering and clustering. 


	Cover_RemoveText2
	OLE_LINK18
	OLE_LINK19
	OLE_LINK20
	OLE_LINK21
	OLE_LINK9
	OLE_LINK13
	OLE_LINK14
	OLE_LINK4
	OLE_LINK11
	OLE_LINK12
	OLE_LINK6

