
Open Geospatial Consortium Inc. 
Date: 2009-09-14 

Reference number of this document: 09-076r3 

Version: 0.3.0 

Category:  OGC Public Discussion Paper 

Editor: Arliss Whiteside 

Uses and summary of Topic 2: Spatial referencing by coordinates  
 

Copyright © 2009 Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc.  
To obtain rights of use, visit http://www.opengeospatial.org/legal/. 

Warning 

This document is not an OGC Standard. This document is an OGC Discussion 
Paper and is therefore not an official position of the OGC membership. It is 
distributed for review and comment. It is subject to change without notice and may 
not be referred to as an OGC Standard. Further, an OGC Discussion Paper should 
not be referenced as required or mandatory technology in procurements. 

 

 

Document type:  OpenGIS® Discussion Paper 
Document subtype: NA 
Document stage:  Approved for Public Release 
Document language:  English 

Copyright © 2009 Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc.  1 

http://www.opengeospatial.org/legal/


OGC 09-076r3 

 
Forward 

Attention is drawn to the possibility that some of the elements of this document may be 
the subject of patent rights. The Open Geospatial Consortium Inc. shall not be held 
responsible for identifying any or all such patent rights. 

Recipients of this document are requested to submit, with their comments, notification of 
any relevant patent claims or other intellectual property rights of which they may be 
aware that might be infringed by any implementation of the standard set forth in this 
document, and to provide supporting documentation. 

 

Table of Contents Page 
1. Introduction ..............................................................................................................2 
2. CRS uses for data sharing ........................................................................................3 
3. CRS identifiers for interoperability .........................................................................4 
4. XML encoding .........................................................................................................4 
5. Topic 2 summary .....................................................................................................5 
6. Definitions copied from Topic 2 ..............................................................................8 

6.1 General concepts ......................................................................................................8 
6.2 Coordinate reference system types ..........................................................................9 
6.3 Datum types .............................................................................................................9 
6.4 Coordinate system types ........................................................................................10 
6.5 Coordinate operation types ....................................................................................11 
6.6 Geodetic CRS terms ...............................................................................................11 
6.7 Projected CRS terms ..............................................................................................12 
6.8 Vertical CRS terms ................................................................................................13 
6.9 Other terms.............................................................................................................14 

7. References ..............................................................................................................14 

1. Introduction 
This document first discusses the uses for data sharing, and then provides a brief 
summary, of OGC Abstract Specification Topic 2: Spatial referencing by coordinates. 
Topic 2 is almost the same as ISO 19111:2007, but includes some corrections.  This 
document includes some best practices for using Coordinate Reference Systems (CRSs). 

Abstract Specification Topic 2 specifies the concepts, definitions, and data model of a 
coordinate reference system (CRS) and its various parts. Readers of this document are 
encouraged to reference the UML diagrams in Topic 2, especially Figures 2, 3, 6, 7, 9, 
11, and 12.  A CRS definition provides the meaning of position coordinates using that 
CRS, and includes an identifier and a somewhat detailed description of that CRS. A CRS 

2 Copyright © 2009 Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc.  



  OGC 09-076r3 

is thus essential (meta) data for sharing most geospatial data, in which spatial positions 
are represented by coordinates. 

2. CRS uses for data sharing 
A CRS definition provides the meaning for position coordinates that use that CRS. Topic 
2 does not discuss the uses of a CRS, but understanding CRS use cases is essential for 
sharing geospatial data in which positions are represented by coordinates. In this data 
sharing, the data represented by coordinates will reference the appropriate CRS(s), and 
CRS definitions are shared when needed. 

 The current uses of CRS definitions in sharing geospatial data include: 

a) A CRS definition provides human-understandable name, aliases, units, direction, and 
origin for each coordinate axis (ordinate from a coordinate tuple), and a name and 
aliases for the CRS, for data that references (or includes) this CRS definition. 

b) A CRS definition (encoded in GML) provides software-useable CRS, datum, and 
coordinate system identifiers, names, and aliases, plus each coordinate axis identifier, 
name, aliases, and units, for data that references (or includes) this CRS definition. 

NOTE 1 The above use has been rare, except for requirements in Sensor Web Enablement (SWE).  
Discussion with the SWE community indicates they require more definition information to be separately 
encoded, especially datum information.  Some persons have thus suggested that they propose extending 
Topic 2 and the corresponding GML encoding. 

c) The source and target CRS identifiers explicitly referenced in a coordinate 
Transformation indicate the intended use of that Transformation, to transform data 
using the source CRS into the corresponding data using the target CRS (or in the 
opposite direction).  These CRS identifiers are also clear when a coordinate 
transformation or equivalent is required by an OGC Web Service operation (e.g., in 
WMS, WFS, WCS). 

NOTE 2 The following use might be interpreted as either a precondition or consequence of the above use. 

d) The CRS identifiers provided for different data sets should indicate if that data is 
directly comparable.  That is, providing the same CRS identifiers for different data 
should indicate that the data is directly comparable, while providing different CRS 
identifiers should indicate that the data is not directly comparable (without 
transformation).  Directly comparable here means that different data with the same 
position coordinates is for (approximately) the same spatial position.  Directly 
comparable means that this data can be meaningfully overlaid or merged. (That is, 
geographic properties such as distances, bearings, and areas can be calculated using 
data from the comparable data sets.)  Of course, the different data is likely to be for 
different times or different feature types.  [Best Practice] 

Uses c) and d) listed above refer to CRS identifiers since shared data users are expected 
to compare CRS identifiers (not complete definitions) for these purposes.  That is, the 
CRS identifiers provided with different data sets are expected to be compared to 
determine if that data is directly comparable [use d)].  Similarly, the CRS identifiers 
provided with different data sets are expected to be used to select a coordinate 

Copyright © 2009 Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc.  3 



OGC 09-076r3 

transformation that could be applied to make different data sets directly comparable [use 
c)]. 

3. CRS identifiers for interoperability 
Use d) listed above in Clause 2 uses the word “should” since nothing is said in Topic 2 
that promotes (or ensures) assignment of CRS identifiers for this use.  However, good 
assignment of CRS identifiers is essential for interoperability among multiple data 
sources and data users.  If one data source produces multiple data sets, it should assign 
CRSs to those sets so that the CRS identifiers indicate if that data is directly comparable.  
Similarly, if multiple interoperating data sources produce multiple data sets, they should 
assign CRSs to those sets so that the CRS identifiers indicate if that data is directly 
comparable.  [Best Practice] 

Good assignment of CRS identifiers may take the form of using widely known CRSs 
with standardized CRS identifiers and definitions.  Geographic CRSs and Projected CRSs 
based on those geographic CRSs are often widely known, and use of standardized CRS 
identifiers and definitions is highly desirable for interoperability.  Such standardization is 
a major purpose of the EPSG database: to define standard CRSs and assign standard 
identifiers to them.  [Best Practice] 

Good assignment of CRS identifiers may take the form of assigning unique CRS 
identifiers for each image and for each object to which an Engineering CRS is applied. 
Each different image requires a different CRS, because it uses a different datum that 
references the specific image.  Similarly, each different object to which an Engineering 
CRS is applied requires a different CRS, using a different datum.  [Best Practice] 

The assignment of CRS identifiers for interoperability is harder in many other cases. One 
such case is a georectified grid, even a grid in a standard Projected CRS or geographic 
CRS. There are many possible rectified grids in one Projected CRS or geographic CRS, 
and work on defining standardized rectified grids is either non-existent or not widely 
known. 

In many of these other cases, assigning CRS identifiers to indicate if data is directly 
comparable seems to require coordination between multiple interoperating data sources.  
Such coordination might be obtained by using one or more central registry(ies) of these 
CRS identifiers and definitions.  The degree to which this is achieved is then one measure 
of the interoperability of multiple data sources.   

4. XML encoding 
Clause 12 “Coordinate reference systems schemas” of GML 3.2.1 specifies how to XML 
encode the definition of a coordinate reference system (CRS), a coordinate system (CS), 
a coordinate axis, a datum, a coordinate operation (including coordinate transformations 
and conversions), an operation method, and an operation parameter.  Such GML 
encoding of these definitions should be used for uses a) and b) listed above in Clause 2.  
[Best Practice] 

On the other hand, XML encoding of CRS references, using CRS identifiers, is usually 
used for uses c) and d) listed above.  In most cases, CRS references use the XML Schema 

4 Copyright © 2009 Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc.  



  OGC 09-076r3 

data type anyURI, to encode a reference to a CRS using its identifier.  This is done by all 
geometries encoded in GML 3, where the gml:SRSReferenceGroup attribute group is 
included in each direct position (gml:pos) or higher-level geometry element.  Use of the 
XML Schema data type anyURI is also specified in Clause 10.3 of OWS Common 1.2. 
NOTE 1 In addition to the CRS identifier, the gml:SRSReferenceGroup attribute group allows inclusion 
of copies of some CRS definition data.  That optional definition data is an ordered list of coordinate axis 
names, and an ordered list of coordinate axis units, both the same as specified in the definition of the 
referenced CRS. 

NOTE 2 OWS Common 1 does not use the gml:SRSReferenceGroup attribute group, or any equivalent, 
since it does not use GML, and it usually encodes CRS references as XML elements (not XML attributes). 

Clause 10.3 of OWS Common 1.2 specifies, and GML 3 allows, an anyURI to reference 
a CRS (or a CRS component) using either of two alternative URI formats:  [Best 
Practice] 

a) Universal Resource Locator (URL), using the standard forms.  The URL format shall 
be used when the referenced definition is known to be electronically available using 
this standard URL.  When not in the same XML document, those definitions shall be 
electronically available over the Internet using this URL.  The available definitions 
shall be encoded in GML, perhaps using one or more GML Application Schemas. 

b) Universal Resource Name (URN), with a specified form.  The URN format shall be 
used whenever the referenced definition is not, or might not be, available using a 
URL.  This URN shall reference data that is specified by some “authority” and is 
“well-known” to both client and server software, including multiple clients and 
multiple servers.   A URN value in the “ogc” URN namespace may be used to 
reference a definition specified in that “ogc” URN namespace.  The format of those 
URNs shall be as specified in OGC Policy documents OGC 09-048, 09-054, and 09-
055. 

NOTE  The OGC is currently in the process of setting up a URN resolver service for assigned URN 
values in the “ogc” URN namespace, as discussed in OGC Policy document OGC 09-046. 

5. Topic 2 summary 
Topic 2 specifies the concepts, and the data required to define, a coordinate reference 
system (CRS), a coordinate system (CS), a coordinate axis, a datum, a coordinate 
operation (including coordinate transformations and conversions), an operation method, 
and an operation parameter.  In more detail: 

a) A CRS specifies the meaning for point position coordinates. 
NOTE  Without a CRS, point position coordinates are essentially meaningless. 

b) Topic 2 does not specify how to encode position coordinates. 
NOTE  Topic 3 (ISO 19107) and GML specify how to encode position coordinates for “direct 
positions” used in a geometry.  OWS Common, WMS, WCS, and other OGC standards specify how to 
encode position coordinates for service input-output positions not in any geometry. 

c) A coordinate reference system relates a coordinate system to a specific object by a 
datum. 

Copyright © 2009 Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc.  5 



OGC 09-076r3 

NOTE  The specific object is often a physical object, such as the earth or a specific moving platform. 
However, the object may be a specific grid coverage. 

d) A CRS definition combines a coordinate system (CS) with a datum, and includes 
unique identifiers for that CRS, CS, datum, and each coordinate axes in that CS. 

NOTE  One CS will often be used with many different datums.  One datum may be used with several 
different CSs. 

e) A datum identifies the location of the origin of the CRS-associated CS. 
NOTE  A datum may identify the location of the origin by means other than identifying the origin point.  
For example, a GeodeticDatum often identifies the location of the origin by specifying the geographic 
coordinates of an identified “fundamental point”. 

f) A datum also (sometimes implicitly) identifies one or more sets of orientation 
directions that are referenced by the coordinate axes in that CS. 

NOTE  This interpretation of a datum is not always fully understood.  If a datum has more than one 
alternate set of orientation directions, as a geodetic datum does, the type of the associated CS selects the 
proper set of datum orientation directions. 

g) A datum (usually) does NOT numerically specify the location of the origin of the 
associated CS, or the set of orientation directions, in any other CRS or CS, and a 
datum should NOT numerically specify these.  [Best Practice] 

h) The location of the origin of the datum should be an identified point on some 
identified object, where an image or other grid coverage is considered such an object.  
[Best Practice] 

i) The anchorDefinition in the definition of an EngineeringDatum should identify a 
specific origin point and the orientation directions for coordinate axes, relative to the 
identified object.  [Best Practice] 

NOTE  The anchorDefinition was previously called the anchorPoint, in GML 3.1.1 and ISO 
19111:2003. (The reason for this change was that the relationship of a datum with the physical object is 
sometimes defined through multiple points, not just one.) 

j) The anchorDefinition in the definition of an ImageDatum should identify a pixel in 
the image as the position of the origin.  [Best Practice] 

k) The anchorDefinition in the definition of an ImageDatum also (perhaps implicitly) 
defines the orientation set of directions in the image object, which are parallel to the 
image pixel rows and columns.  The CS axes are then defined to be in the directions 
of the (perhaps implicit) datum orientation directions.  [Best Practice] 

NOTE 1 As stated in Clause B.3.5 of Topic 2, the anchorDefinition pixel is usually either the centre or a 
corner of the image.  Notice that the anchorDefinition is different from the pixelInCell, which specifies 
whether the origin is centered on a pixel or is halfway between pixel centers 

NOTE 2 Although the anchorDefinition is optional, it should be included in an engineering or image 
datum.  Because the image IS the object, different anchorDefinitions and ImageDatums are needed by 
different images, and the ImageCRS thus must be different for each image.  [Best Practice] 

l) A coordinate system (CS) specifies an ordered sequence of the position coordinate 
axes (ordinates from a coordinate tuple) in that CS.  The specified axis order shall be 
used by the coordinates (ordinates) in recorded coordinate tuples. 

6 Copyright © 2009 Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc.  



  OGC 09-076r3 

m) Each coordinate axis specifies the name(s) of that axis (ordinate), the axis direction, 
and the units that shall be used for recording positions along that axis.   

n) Each axis direction (informally) references a direction of the orientation of the datum 
with which this CS is used by a CRS.  [Best Practice] 

NOTE  This meaning of the axis direction is not explicitly stated in Topic 2, and thus not always 
understood.  The purpose of the axis direction is to prevent ambiguity in associating the axes of a 
coordinate system with the directions defined by the datum. The exact direction of a coordinate axis can 
never be defined in absolute terms, since absolute directions do not exist. 

o) A coordinate axis may be straight or curved, or may be an angle. 
NOTE  Some persons prefer to think of a coordinate axis as always straight, with a coordinate 
conversion to a curve.  However, this terminology is not now supported in Topic 2. Topic 2 deliberately 
and explicitly supports curved spaces, such as the surface of an ellipsoid, or the curved axis of a gravity-
related Vertical CRS. The conversion between curved and straight axes does not take place at the axis or 
coordinate system level, but in coordinate operations between coordinate reference systems. 

p) A coordinate operation defines how to change coordinates from one coordinate 
reference system to another. 

NOTE  A coordinate operation is often based on a one-to-one relationship between corresponding 
coordinates.  However, a coordinate operation may be based on other relationships between corresponding 
coordinates.  For example, a many-to-one relationship usually exists, and is used, from 3D ground 
coordinates to unrectified 2D image coordinates. 

q) A coordinate operation contains values for the operation parameters needed to 
perform this operation, and is associated to one operation method, which describes 
how to perform that operation using values of zero or more parameters. 

NOTE  One operation method will often be used by many different coordinate operations with different 
source and target CRSs, which may use different coordinate axis names. 

r) The CRS, datum, and coordinate operation definitions each contain one or more 
“scope” parameters, to identify expected usage or restrictions and limitations of 
usage. 

NOTE  The “scope” parameter is required, so it must have the value “not known” when the “scope” in 
unknown.  The “scope” may be repeated, but repetition is rare. 

s) Although a CRS, CS, or datum might be used for more than position coordinates, 
such as velocities and accelerations, Topic 2 does not mention these possible uses, 
and thus does not suggest how this should be done. 

NOTE  This (current) limitation of the scope of Topic 2 is not always understood.  (Topic 2 supports the 
DirectPosition specified in ISO 19107, providing the reference information required to interpret the 
position coordinates in the DirectPosition class.) However, extensions and modifications of Topic 2 are 
now being considered to increase its scope. Indeed, a new Topic 19 that extends Topic 2 has been drafted.  
Persons are encouraged to propose extensions to Topic 2 as may be needed to meet their needs. 

t) Topic 2 specifies 7 concrete types of CRS, namely GeodeticCRS, VerticalCRS, 
ImageCRS, EngineeringCRS, ProjectedCRS, DerivedCRS, and CompoundCRS. 

u) Topic 2 specifies 4 concrete types of datum, namely GeodeticDatum, VerticalDatum, 
ImageDatum, and EngineeringDatum. 

v) Topic 2 specifies 9 concrete types of CS, namely EllipsoidalCS, CartesianCS, 
VerticalCS, LinearCS, CylindricalCS, PolarCS, AffineCS, and UserDefinedCS. 

Copyright © 2009 Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc.  7 



OGC 09-076r3 

NOTE  The LinearCS, CylindricalCS, PolarCS, AffineCS, and UserDefinedCS are rarely used. 

w) Topic 2 specifies 4 concrete types of coordinate operation, namely Transformation, 
Conversion, PassThroughOperation, and ConcatenatedOperation. 

x) A ProjectedCRS or DerivedCRS inherits its datum through its baseCRS, and just 
changes the CS using a coordinate Conversion between the old and new CSs. 

6. Definitions copied from Topic 2 
The following definitions from Topic 2 are ordered for top-down understanding. 

6.1 General concepts 

4.5 
coordinate 
one of a sequence of n numbers designating the position of a point in n-dimensional 
space  
NOTE In a coordinate reference system, the coordinate numbers are qualified by units. 

4.46 
unit 
defined quantity in which dimensioned parameters are expressed 
NOTE In this Abstract Specification, the subtypes of units are length units, angular units, time units, 
scale units and pixel spacing units. 

4.8 
coordinate reference system 
coordinate system that is related to an object by a datum 
NOTE For geodetic and vertical datums, the object will be the Earth. 

EDITOR’S NOTE Restating this definition: A coordinate reference system relates its coordinate 
system to a specific object by a datum. The object is often a physical object, such as the earth or a moving 
platform. 

4.14 
datum 
parameter or set of parameters that define the position of the origin, the scale, and the 
orientation of a coordinate system 
EDITOR’S NOTE The words “the scale” in the above definition apply primarily to geodetic 
datums, and this scale reflects very small errors in the geodetic datum. 

4.10 
coordinate system 
set of mathematical rules for specifying how coordinates are to be assigned to points 

4.7 
coordinate operation 

8 Copyright © 2009 Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc.  



  OGC 09-076r3 

change of coordinates, based on a one-to-one relationship, from one coordinate 
reference system to another 
NOTE Supertype of coordinate transformation and coordinate conversion. 

6.2 Coordinate reference system types 

4.23 
geodetic coordinate reference system 
coordinate reference system based on a geodetic datum 

4.47 
vertical coordinate reference system 
one-dimensional coordinate reference system based on a vertical datum 

4.30 
image coordinate reference system 
coordinate reference system based on an image datum 

4.20 
engineering coordinate reference system 
coordinate reference system based on an engineering datum 
EXAMPLES Local engineering and architectural grids; coordinate reference system local to a ship or 
an orbiting spacecraft. 

4.3 
compound coordinate reference system 
coordinate reference system using at least two independent coordinate reference 
systems 
NOTE Coordinate reference systems are independent of each other if coordinate values in one cannot 
be converted or transformed into coordinate values in the other. 

6.3 Datum types 

4.24 
geodetic datum 
datum describing the relationship of a two- or three-dimensional coordinate system to 
the Earth 

4.49 
vertical datum 
datum describing the relation of gravity-related heights or depths to the Earth 

NOTE In most cases, the vertical datum will be related to mean sea level. Ellipsoidal heights are treated 
as related to a three-dimensional ellipsoidal coordinate system referenced to a geodetic datum. Vertical 
datums include sounding datums (used for hydrographic purposes), in which case the heights may be 
negative heights or depths. 

4.31 
image datum 
engineering datum which defines the relationship of a coordinate system to an image 

Copyright © 2009 Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc.  9 



OGC 09-076r3 

4.21 
engineering datum 
local datum 
datum describing the relationship of a coordinate system to a local reference 
NOTE Engineering datum excludes both geodetic and vertical datums. 

EXAMPLE A system for identifying relative positions within a few kilometres of the reference point. 

6.4 Coordinate system types 

4.18 
ellipsoidal coordinate system 
coordinate system in which position is specified by geodetic latitude, geodetic 
longitude and (in the three-dimensional case) ellipsoidal height 

4.2 
Cartesian coordinate system 
coordinate system which gives the position of points relative to n mutually 
perpendicular axes 
NOTE n is 2 or 3 for the purposes of this Abstract Specification. 

4.48 
vertical coordinate system 
one-dimensional coordinate system used for gravity-related height or depth 
measurements 

4.32 
linear coordinate system 
one-dimensional coordinate system in which a linear feature forms the axis 

EXAMPLES Distances along a pipeline; depths down a deviated oil well bore. 

4.44 
spherical coordinate system 
three-dimensional coordinate system with one distance measured from the origin and 
two angular coordinates, commonly associated with a geodetic coordinate reference 
system 

[ISO 19136] 
NOTE Not to be confused with an ellipsoidal coordinate system based on an ellipsoid ‘degenerated’ 
into a sphere. 

4.37 
polar coordinate system 
two-dimensional coordinate system in which position is specified by distance and 
direction from the origin 
NOTE For the three-dimensional case, see spherical coordinate system (4.44). 

4.13 
cylindrical coordinate system 

10 Copyright © 2009 Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc.  



  OGC 09-076r3 

three-dimensional coordinate system with two distance and one angular coordinates 

4.1 
affine coordinate system 
coordinate system in Euclidean space with straight axes that are not necessarily mutually 
perpendicular 

6.5 Coordinate operation types 

4.11 
coordinate transformation 
coordinate operation in which the two coordinate reference systems are based on 
different datums 
NOTE A coordinate transformation uses parameters which are derived empirically by a set of points 
with known coordinates in both coordinate reference systems. 

4.6 
coordinate conversion 
coordinate operation in which both coordinate reference systems are based on the 
same datum 

EXAMPLE Conversion from an ellipsoidal coordinate reference system based on the WGS 84 datum to a 
Cartesian coordinate reference system also based on the WGS 84 datum, or change of units such as from radians to 
degrees or feet to meters. 
NOTE A coordinate conversion uses parameters which have specified values that are not determined 
empirically. 

4.4 
concatenated operation 
coordinate operation consisting of sequential application of multiple coordinate 
operations 

6.6 Geodetic CRS terms 

4.25 
geodetic latitude 
ellipsoidal latitude 
angle from the equatorial plane to the perpendicular to the ellipsoid through a given 
point, northwards treated as positive 

4.26 
geodetic longitude 
ellipsoidal longitude 
angle from the prime meridian plane to the meridian plane of a given point, eastward 
treated as positive 

4.19 
ellipsoidal height 
geodetic height 

Copyright © 2009 Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc.  11 



OGC 09-076r3 

distance of a point from the ellipsoid measured along the perpendicular from the 
ellipsoid to this point, positive if upwards or outside of the ellipsoid 
NOTE Only used as part of a three-dimensional ellipsoidal coordinate system and never on its own. 

4.17 
ellipsoid 
surface formed by the rotation of an ellipse about a main axis 
NOTE In this Abstract Specification, ellipsoids are always oblate, meaning that the axis of rotation is 
always the minor axis. 

4.40 
semi-major axis 
a 
semi-diameter of the longest axis of an ellipsoid 
NOTE This equates to the semi-diameter of the ellipsoid measured in its equatorial plane. 

4.41 
semi-minor axis 
b 
semi-diameter of the shortest axis of an ellipsoid 
NOTE The shortest axis coincides with the rotation axis of the ellipsoid and therefore contains both 
poles. 

4.22 
flattening 
ratio of the difference between the semi-major (a) and semi-minor axis (b) of an 
ellipsoid to the semi-major axis; f = (a – b)/a 
NOTE Sometimes inverse flattening 1/f  = a/(a − b) is given instead; 1/f is also known as reciprocal 
flattening. 

4.35 
meridian 
intersection of an ellipsoid by a plane containing the shortest axis of the ellipsoid 
NOTE This term is often used for the pole-to-pole arc rather than the complete closed figure. 

4.38 
prime meridian 
zero meridian 
meridian from which the longitudes of other meridians are quantified 

6.7 Projected CRS terms 

4.39 
projected coordinate reference system 

12 Copyright © 2009 Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc.  



  OGC 09-076r3 

coordinate reference system derived from a two-dimensional geodetic coordinate 
reference system by applying a map projection 

4.33 
map projection 
coordinate conversion from an ellipsoidal coordinate system to a plane 

4.16 
easting 
E 
distance in a coordinate system, eastwards (positive) or westwards (negative) from a 
north-south reference line 

4.36 
northing 
N 
distance in a coordinate system, northwards (positive) or southwards (negative) from an 
east-west reference line 

6.8 Vertical CRS terms 

4.29 
height 
h, H 
distance of a point from a chosen reference surface measured upward along a line 
perpendicular to that surface 
NOTE A height below the reference surface will have a negative value. 

4.15 
depth 
distance of a point from a chosen reference surface measured downward along a line 
perpendicular to that surface 
NOTE A depth above the reference surface will have a negative value. 

4.27 
geoid 
equipotential surface of the Earth’s gravity field which is everywhere perpendicular to the 
direction of gravity and which best fits mean sea level either locally or globally 

4.28 
gravity-related height 
H 
height dependent on the Earth’s gravity field 
NOTE This refers to in particular orthometric height or normal height, which are both approximations 
of the distance of a point above the mean sea level. 

4.34 
mean sea level 

Copyright © 2009 Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc.  13 



OGC 09-076r3 

average level of the surface of the sea over all stages of tide and seasonal variations 
NOTE Mean sea level in a local context normally means mean sea level for the region calculated from 
observations at one or more points over a given period of time. Mean sea level in a global context differs 
from a global geoid by not more than 2 m. 

6.9 Other terms 

4.12 
coordinate tuple 
tuple composed of a sequence of coordinates 
NOTE The number of coordinates in the coordinate tuple equals the dimension of the coordinate 
system; the order of coordinates in the coordinate tuple is identical to the order of the axes of the coordinate 
system. 

4.42 
sequence 
finite, ordered collection of related items (objects or values) that may be repeated 

[ISO 19107] 

4.43 
spatial reference 
description of position in the real world 
NOTE This may take the form of a label, code or coordinate tuple. 

4.9 
coordinate set 
collection of coordinate tuples related to the same coordinate reference system 

4.45 
tuple 
ordered list of values  

7. References 
[1] OGC 08-015, The OpenGIS® Abstract Specification Topic 2: Spatial referencing by 

coordinates  

[2] OGC 08-010r1, Topic 2 change request - Correct grid cell terms”  
[3] OGC 08-089r3, Topic 2 change request - Correct inconsistencies ”  
[4] OGC 08-149, Topic 2 change request - Change associations to 

GeneralParameterValue” 
NOTE  The three Topic 2 change requests listed above were accepted by the OGC Technical Committee 
in their September 2008 meeting. 

[5] OGC 07-011, The OpenGIS® Abstract Specification Topic 6: Schema for coverage 
geometry and functions  

[6] OGC 07-036, Geography Markup Language (GML), version 3.2.1 

14 Copyright © 2009 Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc.  



  OGC 09-076r3 

Copyright © 2009 Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc.  15 

[7] OGC 06-121r7, OGC Web Services Common, version 1.2 
[8] OGC 04-107, The OpenGIS® Abstract Specification Topic 7: The Earth Imagery 

Case 

 


	Introduction
	2. CRS uses for data sharing
	3. CRS identifiers for interoperability
	4. XML encoding
	5. Topic 2 summary
	6. Definitions copied from Topic 2
	6.1 General concepts
	6.2 Coordinate reference system types
	6.3 Datum types
	6.4 Coordinate system types
	6.5 Coordinate operation types
	6.6 Geodetic CRS terms
	6.7 Projected CRS terms
	6.8 Vertical CRS terms
	6.9 Other terms

	7. References

