
Type name: Application 
  
Subtype name: Standards Tree gml+xml 
  
Required parameters:  None 
  
Optional parameters: 
   "charset" The charset parameter of application/gml+xml is 
   handled in the same fashion as for application/xml, as specified 
   in Section 3.2 of RFC 3023. 
   
   "version": If provided, this parameter indicates the GML version 
   used in the GML document. Only the major and the first minor 
   version number are provided, e.g. "3.2". 
  
   The value may be provided with or without quotes. i.e., 
   application/gml+xml; version=3.1 shall be treated as identical to 
   application/gml+xml; version="3.1". 
  
   In cases where elements from multiple GML versions are used, 
   the parameter shall indicate the highest GML version used in the 
   document. 
  
   The parameter can be used to provide protocol-specific operations, 
   such as version-based content negotiation in HTTP or in the OGC 
   Web Feature Service. 
    
   The parameter is a hint, if used in HTTP content negotiation. I.e., 
   client implementations SHALL be prepared to receive content in a 
   different version than requested and server implementations should 
   honour the version parameter during content negotiation, if  
   possible. 
    
   "profile": If provided, this parameter indicates the GML profiles 
   that the GML document conforms to. This is consistent with the  
   semantics of a profile as laid out in RFC 6906. 
    
   The parameter can also be used to provide protocol-specific  
   operations, such as profile-based content negotiation in HTTP.    
    
   A profile SHALL be identified by a URI. 
    
   As a GML document may conform to more than one GML profile, the  
   parameter SHALL be a whitespace-separated list of profile URIs. 
    
   Each profile URI MUST be the official URI assigned by the publisher of 
   the GML profile. The URI, if dereferenced, SHOULD return information 



   about the GML profile. 
    
   The list of profiles published by the Open Geospatial Consortium is  
   available at http://www.opengis.net/def/profile/ogc/gml. The profiles  
   follow the pattern http://www.opengis.net/def/profile/ogc/gml/{name}. 
  
Encoding considerations: As per Section 3.2 of RFC 3023. 
  
Security considerations: 
   The OGC Geography Markup Language (GML) is a generic XML grammar for 
   exchanging geographic information, but application designers must 
   not assume that it provides generic protection against security 
   threats.  RFC 3023, section 10, discusses security concerns for 
   generic XML, which are also applicable to GML. 
  
   Xlink references in GML documents may cause arbitrary URIs to be 
   dereferenced. In this case, the security issues of RFC 3986, 
   section 7, should be considered. 
  
Interoperability considerations: 
   Different versions of GML specify different XML Schema documents used 
   for the validation of GML documents. Starting with version 3.2, the 
   GML version information is represented in the namespace. As 
   applications may only support a subset of all published GML 
   versions, the use of the version parameter is recommended. 
  
Published specification : 
   GML (Geography Markup Language) is an international standard 
   adopted by both the Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) and 
   International Organization for Standardization (ISO).  
    
   The latest version at the time of writing is GML 3.3.  
    
   The latest version that has been adopted by ISO at the time of  
   writing is GML 3.2 published by ISO as ISO 19136:2007. 
    
   All versions of the standard can be accessed freely online at 
   http://www.opengeospatial.org/standards/gml. 
  
   The OGC GML media type specification has also been approved by  
   the OGC Membership and is published here: 
   http://portal.opengeospatial.org/files/?artifact_id=37743 <document 
   needs to be updated after the media type is registered at IANA> 
  
Applications which use this media type: 
   GML is a generic device-, platform-, and vendor-neutral XML 
   grammar and is supported by a range of applications creating, 



   providing access to and processing geographic information.  
   GML is in use internationally with hundreds of deployed 
   applications able to create and ingest GML payloads, including all 
   of the major GIS vendors, many database providers, earth browser 
   applications, and so forth. 
  
Additional information: 
  
1. Magic number(s):    None. Although no byte sequences can be 
    counted on to consistently identify GML documents, GML 
    documents will have the sequence http://www.opengis.net/gml 
    as part of a namespace declaration to identify the GML 
    namespace. This will usually be towards the top of the document. 
2. File extension(s): .xml or .gml 
3. Macintosh file type code: TEXT 
4. Object Identifiers: None 
  
    The OGC is an international voluntary consensus standards 
    organization focused on defining and maintaining standards that 
    enable interoperability for using geospatial content and services 
    in any application that requires the use of geospatial content or 
    services. The OGC website is www.opengeospatial.org. 
  
Person & email address to contact for further information: 
  
    Name:    Clemens Portele 
    Address: interactive instruments, Bonn, Germany 
    Email:   portele at interactive-instruments.de 
  
Intended usage: Common 
  
Restrictions on usage: 
    None 
  
Author/Change controller: 
    The GML standard is a work product of the Open Geospatial 
    Consortium (OGC). The OGC and the GML Standards Working 
    Group have change control over the GML standard. 
  
    Media types for use in OGC standards and formats are defined 
    by the OGC Members and discussed and approved by the OGC 
    Naming Authority (OGC-NA). The function and role of the OGC-NA 
    is described in RFC 5165 and in the OGC Policies and Procedures 
    here: http://portal.opengeospatial.org/files/?artifact_id=23325 
 


