
 OGC Document 10-128  

OGC Compliance Testing White Paper 
 
By Luis Bermudez  
Director of Interoperability Certification 
Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) 
 
This white paper describes the OGC Compliance Testing Program. It provides 
information about: 

• The need for compliance testing to enable interoperability 
• How to obtain compliance certification 
• The difference between implementing and being certified 
• How compliance benefits providers and users of technology 
• The proper use of the “Certified OGC Compliant” mark 
• Suggested language for procurement documents 
• Trademark licensing fees 
• An example of an OGC compliance test 

 

Important Definitions:  
 

OGC compliance test: A procedure that evaluates a software product for proper 
implementation of an OGC standard. OGC compliance tests are available free and 
online for use by developers preparing for OGC certification of their products.  
 
OGC implementing product: A software product that uses an OGC standard. The 
developer of this software product may not claim that their product is compliant with 
the standard, even if their product has passed an OGC compliance certification test. 
 
OGC compliant product: A software product that has passed the compliance test, 
and that OGC has evaluated and approved as compliant. The compliance evaluation 
process includes the developer submitting proper documentation to OGC 
(Compliance Test Package), the developer paying the appropriate Trademark 
Licensing Fee, and the evaluation of the tests and documentation by OGC staff. The 
developer then has the right to use the “Certified OGC Compliant” service mark 
shown in Figure 1 and legally claim that a product is “OGC compliant”. 
 

 
Figure 1. Certified OGC Compliant service mark with OGC logo 
 
OGC Registered Compliant products: Many developers have implemented OGC 
standards and many of these products are “OGC compliant”. To inform buyers, most 
developers offering OGC compliant products and most developers offering OGC 
implementing products register their products on the OGC “Implementing” page 
(http://www.opengeospatial.org/resource/products).  
 

OGC Document 10-128           22 October 2010            © 2010 Open Geospatial Consortium  
 

1



 OGC Document 10-128  

 
 

Standards compliance and interoperability 

When properly implemented by developers, OGC standards enable different location-
enabled software systems to interoperate, or work together, for improved decision 
making. Widespread interoperability, a critical requirement in today’s networked world, 
depends on users and providers having a way to know whether products and systems 
comply with the standards that enable interoperability.  
 
Interoperability is not just a promise. Today, dissimilar geoprocessing systems on 
enterprise networks and on the Web interoperate for many purposes through common 
interfaces that implement OGC standards. The extent of interoperability enabled by 
OGC standards and implemented in products is growing rapidly. By Sept 2010 there 
were more than 600 Compliant or Implementing Products registered on the OGC web 
site (http://www.opengeospatial.org/resource/products). 
 
The new paradigm of interoperability based on correctly implemented open interface and 
encoding standards offers communities of users many advantages over the old 
paradigm of software systems that were isolated by their proprietary interfaces and 
encodings: 
 
• No single Geographic Information System (GIS), mapping tool, imaging solution, or 

spatial database answers every need. Also the functions previously offered only by 
such products are now, thanks in large part to standards, becoming available as 
services on the Web. 

 
• Geodata is everywhere. Any database record with a description of location can 

become spatial data or geodata. Any text can be parsed against a gazetteer to 
capture location names and thus create geodata. Advances in remote sensing, 
location services, fast processors and broadband data pipes all contribute to a 
growing geodata cornucopia. 

 
• The number of software developers offering components to deal with geographic 

information is growing, not shrinking.  
 
• It is efficient to collect data, maintain it in one place and use it many times. This is 

particularly cost-effective if communities of users can find, access, and use this 
information online. In this case they don’t need to access, retrieve and maintain 
whole files and databases of information that others are responsible for. 

 
• The ability to seamlessly combine accurate, up-to-date data from multiple sources 

opens up new possibilities for improved decision-making and makes data more 
valuable. 

 
• The ability for multiple users, including those who are not geospatial experts, to use 

data (perhaps at different levels with different permissions) also makes the data 
more valuable.  

 
• Service Oriented Architectures (SOA), in which countless Web clients request and 

OGC Document 10-128           22 October 2010            © 2010 Open Geospatial Consortium  
 

2

http://www.opengeospatial.org/resource/products


 OGC Document 10-128  

can receive services from countless Web services, depend on open interfaces that 
enable this “loose coupling” paradigm. In the SOA world, it usually isn’t enough to 
say that clients can communicate with certain servers via those servers’ published 
interfaces. It is also necessary for the interfaces to be properly implemented 
according to standards. The Certified OGC Compliant service mark assures software 
buyers that a server’s interfaces comply with OGC standards.  

Forward-looking buyers of geospatial information systems who purchase products that 
comply with OGC standards look forward to:  
 
• Establishment of shared information service options for their organizations and those 

they serve.  
 
• Streamlining of operations through online geo-information resources and 

improvements in stewardship and sharing of those resources.  
 
• Faster, better service delivery resulting from standards-based technology delivering 

the advantages of component approaches. 
 
• Fiscal benefits and risk reduction. Co-investing with partners in open technology 

platforms and shared data reduces costs and improves information resource 
manageability. 

 

Compliance testing 

An OGC compliance test is a procedure that evaluates a software product for proper 
implementation of an OGC standard. OGC compliance tests are available free and 
online for use by developers preparing for OGC certification of their products. 

Procedure to become legally "Certified OGC Compliant" 

A product’s advertising or packaging may legally carry the Certified OGC Compliant 
service mark for compliance (Figure 1) if the product has passed the compliance test, 
and if it has been evaluated and approved by OGC to be compliant. The compliance 
evaluation process includes the following steps: 
 

1. The product developer tests a product and the product passes the online 
compliance test. 

2. The developer submits proper documentation to OGC (Compliance Test 
Package). This includes a form with information about the passed online 
compliance test. 

3. OGC staff evaluates the test results and creates proper documentation. 
4. The developer agrees to the OGC Trademark License Agreement. 
5. The developer pays the appropriate Trademark Licensing Fee.  
6. OGC grants the compliance certificate. 

 
The mark will be valid for a particular version of a particular standard and it may only be 
used if the product developer has paid for the OGC-supervised compliance test and the 
right to use the mark.  

OGC Document 10-128           22 October 2010            © 2010 Open Geospatial Consortium  
 

3



 OGC Document 10-128  

Difference between implementing and being compliant 

An OGC implementing product is a software product that uses an OGC standard. The 
developer of this software product may not claim that their product is compliant with the 
standard, even if their product has passed an OGC compliance certification test. 
 
Implementing products might interoperate with other implementing products and with 
OGC compliant products, but interoperability between two products is much more likely 
when the products have both passed OGC-supervised compliance tests and carry the 
Certified OGC Compliant service mark. This is because the Certified OGC Compliant 
service mark certifies that the standard has been implemented correctly. 
 
Figure 2 shows the process a developer goes through to implement and claim OGC 
compliance.  A developer can run an OGC compliance test (available free and online) for 
a particular OGC standard to determine whether or not they have correctly implemented 
the standard. At this point the developer can claim that the software implements an 
OGC standard.  The developer can then continue the process of seeking formal OGC 
certification of the product and the right to use the Certified OGC Compliant service 
mark.  

 
Figure 2: “Implementing” products and “Compliant” products. 
 

Benefits for providers of OGC Compliant technology 

For technology providers, compliance testing and use of service marks are important 
because interoperability has become a high priority for users, who are increasingly 

OGC Document 10-128           22 October 2010            © 2010 Open Geospatial Consortium  
 

4



 OGC Document 10-128  

insisting on formal standards compliance when they purchase software. Customers want 
the Certified OGC Compliant service mark because it gives them assurance that their 
products and solutions will be able to interoperate with other systems that have properly 
implemented OGC standards. The Certified OGC Compliant service mark also gives 
integrators confidence that they will be able to efficiently integrate developers' products 
as components in the solutions the integrators provide.  
 
The Certified OGC Compliant service mark gives software resellers a way to back up 
their claims about compliance. OGC standards have been an important contributing 
factor in the growth of the geospatial market because they have eliminated technology-
imposed barriers to the wider use of geospatial data and processing. OGC compliance is 
increasingly necessary for technology providers to participate in this expanded market 
because more and more users understand what has happened and why it has 
happened, and the users see the logic in demanding the Certified OGC Compliant 
service mark. Ultimately independent software developers and resellers can increase 
their market reach by delivering OGC Compliant solutions. 
 

Benefits for buyers of OGC Compliant technology 

For buyers, the Certified OGC Compliant service mark can save money and it can also 
ensure user access to essential services and information. Making the user’s experience 
as error-free as possible is important to maintaining the credibility of a business or 
agency. Accountability is also important: Who is responsible for a particular online 
service? The Certified OGC Compliant service mark will probably never be seen by the 
agency’s or service provider’s users, but those users will get more reliable service, they 
will spend less time and money manually converting between data formats, and they will 
benefit from the earlier arrival of new products and services. These improvements will 
provide them with more time to focus on other business-critical areas and improve 
productivity associated with geospatial data management. 
 
Interoperability – and the Certified OGC Compliant service mark – should be a major 
consideration in an organization’s technology procurement policy. It provides confidence, 
reduces risks, and increase systems interoperability.  
 
Confidence in purchased products. An OGC service mark on a product gives buyers 
the confidence that a product will work with another product that carries the same OGC 
service mark, regardless of which company developed the product.  
 
Reduction of technology risk. For purchasers of geospatial technology products and 
services, reducing “technology risk” is an important goal, and the Certified OGC 
Compliant service mark helps achieve that goal. Reducing technology risk is a software 
lifecycle management issue. Organizations whose significant investments in technology 
require rigorous product and system lifecycle management depend on OGC compliance 
to help them maintain business continuity and durability of their enterprise architectures. 
In short, procurement of Certified OGC Compliant products “future-proofs” IT investment. 
 
Increase of Systems interoperability. Certified OGC Compliant products help diverse, 
distributed software components and systems to interoperate. The components may be 
elements of a new component-based solution, or they may be legacy systems that have 
been upgraded with interfaces that implement OGC standards. The components could 

OGC Document 10-128           22 October 2010            © 2010 Open Geospatial Consortium  
 

5



 OGC Document 10-128  

be components purchased in the future from different developers to add functionality to a 
system. Systems used by data sharing partners, now and in the future, interoperate 
more reliably if those partners’ systems use Certified OGC Compliant products. 
 

How does one know that a product is "Certified OGC Compliant"? 

If a product legally carries the Certified OGC Mark in Figure 1 it is Certified OGC 
Compliant. 
 

Registry of OGC implementing and compliance products 

A buyer can confirm whether the product is an “implementing product” or is “Certified 
OGC compliant” by looking for the product name on the OGC Website at 
http://www.opengeospatial.org/resource/products.  
 

Proper use of the OGC Service Mark 

The OGC service mark in Figure 1 must be used in conjunction with one or more 
individual OGC standard service marks such as those shown in Figure 3. 
 
Version numbers are important – while the OGC strives to preserve backwards 
compatibility, using the same version of a standard will optimize interoperability.  
 
 

 
 

Figure 3. Certified OGC Compliant service marks for individual standards 
 
Providers may use OGC service marks in product literature, on their web site, and in 
other sales and marketing materials to indicate that they have achieved official 
compliance with one or more OGC standards.  
 

OGC Document 10-128           22 October 2010            © 2010 Open Geospatial Consortium  
 

6

http://www.opengeospatial.org/resource/products


 OGC Document 10-128  

Enforcing standards in procurement language 

Software and system buyers help their organizations, their information-sharing partners 
and the larger industry when they insist on the Certified OGC Compliant service mark. 
But how does one do this? How does one communicate to bidders that they must offer 
OGC compliant products? 
 
The best way to begin is to prepare a "notional architecture" document. One example of 
such a document is the 2005 "Spatial Interoperability Demonstration Project (SIDP) 
Notional Architecture Executive Summary" 
(http://portal.opengeospatial.org/files/?artifact_id=10687) prepared by the Open 
Geospatial consortium – Australasia (OGC-A). Another example is the 2006 slide set, 
"Enabling Framework - A Technical Architecture" by Martin Brewer, SLIP-EF Chief 
Technical Officer at the Western Australia Department of Land Information 
(https://www2.landgate.wa.gov.au/slip/portal/home/latest-news-
files/02_EFTechnicalArchitecture.pps). 
 
A notional architecture is, to quote from the SIDP document, "... an idealized description 
of the services and interfaces required to construct interoperable spatial infrastructure 
systems. The architecture is notional in that it makes no assumptions about physical 
implementation and the only assumption made about vendors and institutions is that 
they accept and support open, non-proprietary standards.” 
  
Such a document explains what kind of interoperability is necessary and which 
standards must be implemented to provide that interoperability. Bidders must show, and 
buyers must evaluate in their technical evaluations, whether or not the offerings 
implement and/or are compliant with the necessary standards.  
 
It may happen that certain desirable products have not yet implemented necessary OGC 
standards, but the vendor claims that implementation and certification are pending. Or it 
may be that OGC has not yet provided compliance tests for certain necessary 
standards. In such cases, bidders may commit to providing the necessary 
implementations and certifications as soon as these actions become possible. Such 
commitments can be negotiated and set forth in service level agreements.  
 
Open standards are a result of demand for interoperability and requirements for data 
and services to be shared across organizations and communities. The Certified OGC 
Compliant service mark represents a level of professionalism that puts software 
purchasers as well as solution providers on the most certain path to interoperability.  
 

Suggested OGC Certification Language for Procurement texts 

OGC compliance tests are available for many but not all OGC standards. The OGC is 
constantly increasing the number and percentage of standards for which tests are 
available. The important thing to remember is this: 
 
Procurement language – the terms spelled out in tenders and requests for quotes 
(RFQs) – should require or strongly encourage vendors to offer Certified OGC Compliant 
products when tests exist for OGC standards that apply to the functionality of those 
products. When OGC compliance tests do not yet exist for a standard, procurement 

OGC Document 10-128           22 October 2010            © 2010 Open Geospatial Consortium  
 

7

http://portal.opengeospatial.org/files/?artifact_id=10687
https://www2.landgate.wa.gov.au/slip/portal/home/latest-news-files/02_EFTechnicalArchitecture.pps
https://www2.landgate.wa.gov.au/slip/portal/home/latest-news-files/02_EFTechnicalArchitecture.pps


 OGC Document 10-128  

language should require or strongly encourage vendors to offer products that implement 
OGC standards.  
 

Digital nuts and bolts about compliance testing 

To understand software compliance testing, it’s necessary to understand software 
standards. Just as speakers and listeners of a human language must understand and 
agree to the same rules of vocabulary, grammar and pronunciation, computer systems 
that exchange data and instructions must have matching interfaces that send and 
receive data encoded according to strict rules. An OGC standard is a specification that 
describes the matching software interfaces and data encodings necessary for a 
particular kind of exchange of instructions or data. An OGC standard documents all the 
details a software developer needs to take into account when implementing software 
that will “speak the same geospatial language” as other software programs that 
implement that standard.  
 
A compliance test determines whether a software program has correctly implemented a 
standard, in all its details. 
 
Below is a brief example of a client request made to a server that implements an OGC 
standard. We chose this “http://www….” example because most people use software 
without ever seeing any actual software code other than that ever-present 
“http://www…”, which is itself one of the key standards that enable the World Wide Web. 
 
One of the interfaces defined by the OGC Web Map Service (WMS) Standard is 
GetMap, an interface to obtain a simple map image in a common image format (PNG, 
JPEG, PPM, or TIFF) that can be displayed easily on a website or inserted into a 
document. A standard Web browser can ask any developer's OGC compliant Web Map 
Service to provide a map simply by submitting a WMS request in the form of a URL 
(Uniform Resource Locator, a W3C standard, well known because of the public visibility 
of a URL’s http:// prefix.). Here is a GetMap request for a particular AVHRR 
(Advanced Very High Resolution Radiometer) image: 
 

http://a-map-co.com/mapserver.cgi?VERSION=1.2.0& 
REQUEST=GetMap&CRS=CRS:4326&BBOX=-97.105,24.913,-
78.794,36.358&WIDTH=560&HEIGHT=350&LAYERS=AVHRR-09-
27&STYLES=&FORMAT=image/png&EXCEPTIONS=INIMAGE 

 
“BBOX” is one of 11 parameters in this request. The OGC WMS standard tells 
programmers that, in a WMS map request, "BBOX" means "bounding box" and that 
BBOX must be followed by "=" and then by two points (corners of the bounding box) 
expressed as latitude/longitude coordinate pairs. The WMS standard answers 
programmers’ questions such as: Which corners of the bounding box do these points 
define? What's the order of the coordinate pair? Are those miles or kilometers? Will 
integers work or must the numbers be floating point numbers?  
 
The WMS standard "captures consensus" on such questions. The world's interested 
geospatial software experts agreed in OGC's consensus process that this is how a Web-
based map request should work. As in all software programs, programmers need to get 
many small details exactly right. If the client request correctly implements the WMS 

OGC Document 10-128           22 October 2010            © 2010 Open Geospatial Consortium  
 

8



 OGC Document 10-128  

standard, and if the server correctly implements the standard, the client will get a map 
from the server and display it.  
 
The OGC WMS Compliance Test tests implementations of the OGC WMS Standard to 
ensure that the implementers got all the details right.  

Compliance testing program documentation 

The Compliance Testing document on the OGC website (available as a pdf file 
downloadable from http://portal.opengeospatial.org/files/?artifact_id=7586) describes the 
OGC Compliance Testing Program in detail. The document defines the approach, 
including policies and procedures that the OGC uses for compliance testing of server 
side implementations of specific OGC standards.   
 
After the developer obtains the trademark license, when a visitor to the OGC website’s 
Products page (http://www.opengeospatial.org/resource/products) moves the cursor 
over the product name, a “Certified OGC Compliant” service mark appears. This service 
mark indicates that compliance with a particular OGC standard has been achieved, and 
this service mark provides an incentive for potential customers to preferentially purchase 
such products.  
 
A fully executed OGC Trademark License Agreement, fully paid trademark license fees, 
and full compliance with the Trademark License Agreement terms are mandatory for an 
organization to use the "Certified OGC Compliant" mark with its product(s) in any way or 
to claim "compliance" with OGC Implementation Standards.  
 
There are currently hundreds of organizations worldwide who use the “Certified OGC 
Compliant service mark as an integral part of their product marketing. 
 

Trademark Licensing Fees 

The OGC does not charge a fee for compliance testing under the Testing Procedure. 
 
The OGC does charge a fee for trademark licensing for Candidate Products that 
successfully pass a compliance test under the Testing Procedure; this fee is called the 
Trademark Licensing Fee. This fee must be paid by providers that want to claim 
compliance with OGC Implementation Standards. This fee is not required to initiate and 
complete a test. The current fee structure is available at 
http://www.opengeospatial.org/compliance#trademark. 
 
The governing information for Trademark Licensing Fees is available at 
http://www.opengeospatial.org/ogc/policies/trademark. 

Caveats 

ICT standards are the backbone of the ICT industry, but they are usually complex and 
need time to mature. OGC standards have matured to the point where they are widely 
implemented and largely uncontested as the standards that developers employ to build 
systems that can exchange geospatial data and geoprocessing commands with other 
systems. But compliance testing is also complex and takes time to mature. We list below 
a number of issues regarding compliance testing, because we believe that increased 

OGC Document 10-128           22 October 2010            © 2010 Open Geospatial Consortium  
 

9

http://portal.opengeospatial.org/files/?artifact_id=7586
http://www.opengeospatial.org/resource/products
http://www.opengeospatial.org/compliance#trademark
http://www.opengeospatial.org/ogc/policies/trademark


 OGC Document 10-128  

OGC Document 10-128           22 October 2010            © 2010 Open Geospatial Consortium  
 

10

understanding of OGC’s compliance testing program, including an understanding of its 
limitations, will lead to more participation in the program and more demand for the 
Certified OGC Compliant service mark. The following are existing caveats as of 
September 2010.  
 
• OGC compliance tests are available for some but not all OGC standards. The OGC 

is continually enhancing and expanding the Compliance Testing Program, and we 
encourage interested organizations to participate in this effort. If a software product 
includes an interface (or if a data product is based on an encoding) that implements 
a specific OGC standard, but the product has not passed a compliance test (perhaps 
because no test is yet available), the product's developer can label the product as 
"implementing" a specific OGC standard. For example: "This product implements the 
OGC Geography Markup Language (GML) Standard, version 2.1." The developer 
may also say: "This product will be submitted to OGC for compliance testing." 

 
• Compliance testing addresses the degree to which a product has properly 

implemented the standard. Compliance testing does not ensure or test full 
interoperability between different software products. Applications that use compliant 
interfaces and encodings usually interoperate well. As a standard matures and as 
more organizations contribute requirements, comments and expertise, non-
interoperability problems become less common. In the OGC, new compliance tests 
are constantly being developed, and the testing program continues to evolve to meet 
the needs of industry. 

 
• OGC is exploring the next level of compliance – interoperability certification. The first 

step of this process is the conduct of plugfests where developers are invited to test 
their OGC Certified Compliant products with other certified products. OGC 
anticipates formalizing interoperability certification in the near future.  

 
• Currently the CITE program only tests server products. In other words, the program 

can only test whether server products generate compliant responses to client-side 
products. The program does not presently offer capability to test compliance of client 
side products, although this capability is being considered for future compliance 
testing. 

 


	Standards compliance and interoperability
	Compliance testing
	Procedure to become legally "Certified OGC Compliant"
	Difference between implementing and being compliant
	Benefits for providers of OGC Compliant technology
	Benefits for buyers of OGC Compliant technology
	How does one know that a product is "Certified OGC Compliant"?
	Registry of OGC implementing and compliance products
	Proper use of the OGC Service Mark
	Enforcing standards in procurement language
	Suggested OGC Certification Language for Procurement texts
	Digital nuts and bolts about compliance testing
	Compliance testing program documentation
	Trademark Licensing Fees
	Caveats

