
The Open Geospatial Consortium and EarthCube 
An EarthCube Technology Paper 

Prepared by David Maidment1, Ben Domenico2, Alastair Gemmell3, Kerstin Lehnert4,  
David Tarboton5 and Ilya Zaslavsky6 

OGC Document 11-159 
18 October 2011 

Introduction 

EarthCube aims to create an integrated system to access, analyze and share information that is 
used by the entire geosciences community.   The Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) is an 
organization of which more than four hundred companies and agencies are members, whose 
purpose is to create open source standards for sharing geospatial and observational information.   
The authors of this paper are users of OGC standards in our work in hydrology, meteorology, 
climatology, oceanography and in the solid earth sciences, in other words, in key disciplinary 
fields that contribute to the Geosciences.    Moreover, the OGC has an effective process for 
engaging individuals from many countries in standards development and interoperability testing 
that encourages them to set aside the roles they play in their home organizations and instead 
focus just on what is needed to share a particular class of information across the globe.   This 
paper examines the hypothesis that an OGC-like process could be useful for broader sharing of 
information in the geosciences. 

OGC Information Standards 

The OGC has developed standards for sharing geospatial and observational information as web 
services.   A web service is a function that enables one computer to make requests to another 
computer in a structured way and to receive appropriately coded responses in return.   Sharing 
geoscience information requires the capacity to publish, catalog, discover, access and process 
information located on computers at any geographic location.   OGC geospatial information 
service standards include: 

• Web Map Service – for communicating georeferenced images; 
• Web Feature Service – for communicating geospatial features as points, lines or areas 

with attached tabular attributes, that is, discrete spatial objects; 
• Web Coverage Service – for communicating continuous spatial fields as 

multidimensional arrays. 
• Web Processing Service – for executing functions or models on remote computers  

The OGC information framework for observational data is founded on an observations and 
measurements model that has four key components – a feature of interest has properties that are 
observed by a process that produces a result.   This model originated in the solid earth sciences 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
1	  Center	  for	  Research	  in	  Water	  Resources,	  University	  of	  Texas	  at	  Austin	  
2	  Unidata	  Program	  Center,	  Universities	  Corporation	  for	  Atmospheric	  Research,	  Boulder,	  Colorado	  
3	  Environmental	  Systems	  Science	  Centre,	  University	  of	  Reading,	  United	  Kingdom	  
4	  Lamont-­‐Doherty	  Earth	  Observatory,	  Columbia	  University,	  New	  York	  
5	  Utah	  Water	  Research	  Laboratory,	  Utah	  State	  University,	  Logan,	  Utah	  
6	  San	  Diego	  Supercomputer	  Center,	  University	  of	  California,	  San	  Diego	  



OGC	  11-­‐159	  The	  Open	  Geospatial	  Consortium	  and	  EarthCube	  

2	  
	  

where it is used to describe properties of geological units (features of interest) via sampling 
features such as transects, wells, or specimens, but it has been generalized into the fluid domains 
where the feature of interest is understood to be a fluid domain in the vicinity of an observation 
instrument whose properties are being measured by that instrument.    Sensor Web Enablement is 
a set of OGC specifications that define information encoding and service interfaces for 
interacting with a network of sensors through internet, and within this there is a Sensor 
Observation Service that describes how to query and obtain information from a particular 
instrument. 

An organization may provide access to a large number of web services, and to index them, OGC 
has developed a Catalog Services for the Web, which provides a single end-point web address 
through which the underlying services can be individually discovered and accessed, rather like 
going to the card catalog when entering a library in the traditional style.  

Services in Solid Earth Science 

Geospatially referenced data in the Solid Earth Science are characterized by their highly diverse 
nature, ranging from large-volume sensor-based time series measurements to small but highly 
diverse and unstructured data generated ‘manually’ by investigators in the field or ex-situ in the 
lab. The integration of these heterogeneous data types is critical for many of the large scientific 
questions and challenges in the Solid Earth Sciences. Major NSF-funded science initiatives such 
as Ridge2000, GeoPrisms, and the Critical Zone Observatories require integration of multi-
disciplinary datasets. OGC Web Map Service and Web Feature Service providers have 
successfully been deployed by major Solid Earth Science data centers such as UNAVCO, IRIS, 
the Marine Geoscience Data System, the National Geophysical Data Center, and EarthChem to 
advance the integrated discovery and (Figure 1).  

 

Figure 1.  WMS and WFS features and layers include GPS campaign surveys and continuous stations, 
seismic stations, earthquake locations, seafloor bathymetry, expedition tracks. 

A higher level of interoperability and data integration in the Solid Earth Sciences can be 
achieved by applying the OGC Observation & Measurements (O&M) model to encode different 
types of observational data. White papers submitted by Rick Hooper and Ilya Zaslavsky 
emphasize that the OGC O&M model can provide a common basic encoding for both sensor-



OGC	  11-­‐159	  The	  Open	  Geospatial	  Consortium	  and	  EarthCube	  

3	  
	  

based and sample-based observational data. Several O&M profiling efforts are emerging in the 
Solid Earth Sciences (EarthChemXML, SoilML) and will complement existing standards such as 
WaterML 2.0 for hydrologic data and the Climate Science Modeling Language (CSML) for 
atmospheric and oceanographic data. 

Services in Atmospheric Science 

Standards play a key role in allowing the Unidata Program Center to make data available to other 
communities without diluting the support provided to the core community of researchers and 
educators in the atmospheric sciences.   While it is not practical for the Unidata Program Center 
to support the specialized analysis and display tools of other disciplines, it is important to make 
the datasets available via standard protocols so users from these other disciplines can continue to 
make use of their own tailored analysis and display tools with data available from Unidata.    
Standards are also enabling Unidata to work with others who provide complementary functions.    
 
Web Processing Services are emerging as a key element in distributed systems that enable more 
analysis and display functions to be performed on the server side.   This has several advantages, 
for example, in the era of "big data," the processing can be done where the data reside.  It also 
makes it feasible to initiate and control sophisticated interactive data analysis and processing 
from more modest mobile platforms.    To gain a sense of power afforded by incorporating 
weather data into analyses done using tools from the GIS community, Figure 2 shows 
demographic information as an overlay on real-time, high resolution, local forecast models being 
run in regions of high precipitation probability.   The weather data is conveyed in netCDF 
(network Common Data Form) via the OGC Web	  Coverage	  Service protocol.  NetCDF is the first 
binary encoding format standard of the OGC. 

 
  Figure 2. ArcMap Rendering of Schools and Hospitals in a Region of High Precipitation 

Services in Ocean Science 

Over the last five to ten years in the ocean sciences there has been an increasingly strong 
adoption of OGC standards, and related applications and projects. Many of these have employed 
the OGC Web Map Service standard and used it for serving gridded ocean model and satellite-



OGC	  11-­‐159	  The	  Open	  Geospatial	  Consortium	  and	  EarthCube	  

4	  
	  

derived data products. Examples of such projects and applications include the Integrated Ocean 
Observing System – OpenIOOS, MyOcean (which employs the University of Reading’s ncWMS 
software), IMOS – the Australian Integrated Marine Observing System and the SeaDataNet 
project.  More recently there has been an upsurge in the use of other OGC web service standards, 
including extensive use of the the OGC Sensor Web suite of standards, especially the Sensor 
Observation service (SOS). This is becoming the preferred way of serving in situ data streams in 
the marine community, as opposed to the Web Feature Service which is not as well suited to 
handling time series data. This is partly because the Web Feature Service standard is designed to 
serve features as a whole, and sub-setting is a common requirement in this type of service. 
Projects and initiatives which have incorporated the use of the SOS standard include OOSTethys, 
OpenIOOS and the OGC Oceans Science Interoperability Experiment. 

Figure 3 shows a Web Processing Service by which the difference between two sea surface 
temperature grids is computed – the request for the computation is initiated at the University of 
Reading, the calculation is done with the grids in netCDF format at the British Atmospheric Data 
Center, and the result is delivered back to the University of Reading as a Web Map Service. 

 

Figure 3.  Sea Surface Temperatures – a Web Processing Service delivers a Web Map Service 

Services in Hydrologic Science 

Hydrologic science relies on data from multiple sources and advancing understanding in 
hydrology requires combining information from multiple lines of inquiry.  Figure 4 (a) shows a 
hydrologic scientist accessing information from GIS, modeling, observations, weather and 
climate modeling and remote sensing.   Observations data measured at point locations are 
particularly important for hydrologic science, such as streamflow and rainfall gages, water 
quality sampling points, and groundwater wells.  Some of this information is obtained from 
intensely measured small watersheds, including the Critical Zone Observatories, but synoptic 
scale studies of the nation or large regions rely very largely on observations made by water 
agencies of federal, state and local government. 



OGC	  11-­‐159	  The	  Open	  Geospatial	  Consortium	  and	  EarthCube	  

5	  
	  

The Consortium of Universities for the Advancement of Hydrologic Science, Inc (CUAHSI) has 
invented a language, WaterML, for the communication of water observations data as a web 
service, and the US Geological Survey and some other water agencies have adopted WaterML 
and now publish their real-time and historical time series information in this format.   CUAHSI 
has indexed water observations information at about 2.3 million locations in the US (Figure 
4(b)), and provided access to this information in WaterML.   Beginning in 2008, CUAHSI has 
been working with the OGC to modify WaterML, and a revised version, WaterML2, is being 
considered for adoption by the OGC as a profile or specialized version of the OGC Observations 
and Measurements specification,  and thus as an international standard for encoding water 
observations data. 

  
Figure 4.  CUAHSI Hydrologic Information System 

Geoscience Information Services 

Any information system that emerges from EarthCube will build on the information 
infrastructure that NSF presently supports in the Geosciences.   This includes several long-
established data centers, such as the Unidata in Boulder and the IRIS Center in Seattle, and some 
newer initiatives including the CUAHSI Hydrologic Information System program and the 
Integrated Earth Data Applications at the Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory.   Each of these 
activities focuses on the needs of a particular domain geoscience community and because 
domain sciences tend to view the same physical circumstances in different ways, and even using 
different language, it is likely that there will always be the need for variations in terminology for 
different domain communities.    This is similar to the task that the OGC deals with in 
developing international standards in the face of different languages of the countries its members 
represent.    At its core, however, information about the earth rests upon a physical model of the 
shape of the earth and of the evolution through time of the phenomena that take place on and 
within the surface of the earth, its atmosphere and oceans.   This suggests that it is possible to 
develop a common set of Geoscience Information Services that the domain science communities 
could share. 

In geoscience cyberinfrastructure projects, reliance on service-oriented architecture (SOA) is 
now a common approach to organizing distributed nodes of information.  While the variety of 
problems and research designs in the “earth science fabric” leads to increased complexity of 
scientific data types and respective services, standardizing on a limited set of information models 
and services, adopting them as community standards and making the services available via 
representative hubs would help resolve a range of common challenges in the earth sciences. 
These include discovery and interpretation of data from neighboring disciplines; added 



OGC	  11-­‐159	  The	  Open	  Geospatial	  Consortium	  and	  EarthCube	  

6	  
	  

confidence in data that have complete standards-compliant metadata, including QA/QC 
information (which is critical for establishing trust in such a diverse data-rich environment); 
ability to access data from anywhere in the system via common interfaces and bring them into 
applications that each discipline is familiar with. This vision, however, requires that the certain 
nodes in the EarthCube system (information hubs) are developed to support easy translation 
between disciplines. They would include services for translating structure, syntax and semantics 
between information models, services and vocabularies adopted by different domains, and would 
publish metadata catalogs that can be federated with metadata catalogs in other domains, for a 
one-stop data discovery and interpretation. In addition to “semantic web” elements, these 
translations will be helped by scientists themselves who will be able to connect and explain their 
data via social networks. EarthCube is first and foremost about connecting people.  

OGC Process 

The OGC has two component programs, a Standards program and an Interoperability program, 
which develop standards and test them in practical situations.    Standards development occurs by 
taking existing standards and developing more extensive specifications, or profiles, that serve 
particular purposes.  Interoperability testing is carried out by interoperability experiments, pilot 
studies and testbeds, that represent successively increasing degrees of commitment and 
involvement by the participant organizations in testing proposed standards.   Domain working 
groups for particular disciplines focus activity in specialized areas of interest.   The momentum 
of this activity is maintained by Technical Committee meetings that are held each three months 
at some location in the world, where standards are adopted and information exchanged in person 
among groups that otherwise communicate electronically. 

Conclusions 

The geosciences community embraces both the solid earth and fluid earth sciences and considers 
observed and modeled information distributed over the globe.   Web services provide a 
mechanism for one computer to request information from another in a structured way for a 
variety of information types.   The Open Geospatial Consortium is an international standards 
organization for developing web services for geospatial and observational information, including 
standards for cataloging and processing that information, and has recently joined with the World 
Meteorological Organization to jointly develop standards for information in hydrology, 
meteorology, climatology and oceanography.   OGC standards are already fairly widely used in 
the NSF geosciences community.   All these things suggest that EarthCube should seriously 
consider as one option for its development an OGC-based services-oriented architecture for the 
geosciences. 

Should NSF decide to proceed in that direction, this could involve the formation of domain 
working groups within individual geoscience disciplines, the formation of a Technical 
Committee for the Geoscience Information Services that considers common information 
standards across the geosciences, regular meetings each three months of the Technical 
Committee at NSF data centers around the United States, the advancement of web services 
standards in areas where current standards are deficient, and the testing of services provision 
through pilot studies where formal testing of the effectiveness of delivery of information is 
undertaken. 


