
  
 

 

Open Geospatial Consortium 
Date: 2012-01-25 

Reference number of this document: OGC 11-111 

 

Category: OpenGIS® Public Comments & Responses 

Editor(s): Daniele Marchionni 

Ordering Services for Earth Observation Products  

Adoption Voting Comments and Answers 
 

 

Copyright © 2012 Open Geospatial Consortium 
To obtain additional rights of use, visit http://www.opengeospatial.org/legal/. 

 

Warning 

This document is not an OGC Standard. It is distributed for review and comment. It 
is subject to change without notice and may not be referred to as an OGC Standard. 

Recipients of this document are invited to submit, with their comments, notification 
of any relevant patent rights of which they are aware and to provide supporting 
documentation. 

Document type: OpenGIS® Public Comments & Responses 
Document subtype: Informative 
Document stage: Approved 
Document language: English 



Ordering Services for Earth Observation Products Public Comments and Answers OGC 11-111 

 

ii Copyright © 2012 Open Geospatial Consortium 
 

Contents Page 

1	   Ordering Services for Earth Observation Products Public NO votes and 
Answers ................................................................................................................... 1	  

1.1	   Maynard, Michael (Lockheed Martin) No vote ................................................. 1	  
1.1.1	   Comment ........................................................................................................ 1	  

1.1.1.1	   Revised comment ............................................................................................... 2	  
1.1.2	   OSEO SWG Answers .................................................................................... 3	  

1.2	   Herring, John (Oracle USA) No vote ................................................................. 5	  
1.2.1	   Comment ........................................................................................................ 5	  
1.2.2	   OSEO SWG Answers .................................................................................... 6	  

1.2.2.1	   Conclusion .......................................................................................................... 9	  
1.3	   de La Beaujardiere, Jeff (US National Oceanic and Atmospheric 

Administration (NOAA) No vote ....................................................................... 9	  
1.3.1	   Comment ........................................................................................................ 9	  
1.3.2	   OSEO SWG Answers .................................................................................. 11	  

 

i. Preface 

This document lists the No votes received during the TC adoption vote (2011-05-03 - 
2011-07-02) together with the responses from the OSEO SWG. 

ii. Document terms and definitions 

none 

iii. Document contributor contact points 

All questions regarding this document should be directed to the editor or the contributors: 

Name e-mail Organization 
Daniele Marchionni daniele.marchionni@telespazio.com TELESPAZIO 
   



Ordering Services for Earth Observation Products Public Comments and Answers OGC 11-111 

 

Copyright © 2012 Open Geospatial Consortium iii 
 

iv. Revision history 

Date Release Editor Primary clauses 
modified 

Description 

2011-08-11 1.0 D. Marchionni all first version 
2011-10-17 1.1 D.Marchionni  Added No vote from NOAA 
     



Ordering Services for Earth Observation Products Public Comments and Answers OGC 11-111 

 

iv Copyright © 2012 Open Geospatial Consortium 
 

Foreword 

This document lists all the No votes received during the TC adoption vote of the OGC 
06-141r6 Ordering Services For Earth Observation Products together with the responses 
from the OSEO SWG. 

Attention is drawn to the possibility that some of the elements of this document may be 
the subject of patent rights. The Open Geospatial Consortium Inc. shall not be held 
responsible for identifying any or all such patent rights. 

Recipients of this document are requested to submit, with their comments, notification of 
any relevant patent claims or other intellectual property rights of which they may be 
aware that might be infringed by any implementation of the standard set forth in this 
document, and to provide supporting documentation. 



Ordering Services for Earth Observation Products Public Comments and Answers OGC 11-111  

 

Copyright © 2012 Open Geospatial Consortium 1 
 

1 Ordering Services for Earth Observation Products Public NO votes and 
Answers 

During the Order Service adoption vote, several “No” votes were received: 

 2 No votes from ORACLE and Lockheed Martin, casted during the first voting 
period. 

 1 No vote from NOAA, casted during the second voting period. 

 As per OGC policy, the vote was suspended and an adjudication cycle was initiated after 
the first 2 No votes. The voting was suspended on 29/6 and the required two weeks 
comments review period was extended by 3 weeks as requested by Lockheed Martin in 
order to allow them time to properly review the additional documentation provided by the 
SWG and for supporting the LM point of contact hand over to Bishr Yaser, which has 
replaced Michael J Maynard. The issue with Lockheed Martin (and also with ORACLE) 
has been solved and the voting resumed on 18/08/2011:  

 Second voting period: 18/8/2011 – 31/08/2011 

During the second voting period a further “No” vote has been casted by NOAA. 

This document reports all the No votes and the answers provided by the SWG. 

1.1 Maynard, Michael (Lockheed Martin) No vote 

1.1.1 Comment 

Based on Lockheed Martin review of the documentation provided for the “Ordering 
Services for Earth Observation Products Interface Standard”, it is apparent that the 
specification has not been reviewed by any US Government agencies or US imagery 
providers. Since the US Government is one of the largest consumers of commercial 
imagery, their review is essential prior to approval of this specification. Also, in its 
current state the specification is limited to satellite electro optical imagery and does not 
cover any satellite SAR, aerial imagery, or LIDAR; which are Earth Observation 
Products in the opinion of Lockheed Martin. Lockheed suggests that it may be simpler to 
change the title of the specification to “Ordering Services for Commercial Satellite EO 
Imagery Products”; however this may not be sufficient as GeoEye and Digital Globe may 
not agree with the specification. Lockheed Martin recommends that a Technical 
Exchange Meeting (TEM) be conducted with the appropriate US government and US-
based imagery providers in attendance to review and potentially edit this specification. 



Ordering Services for Earth Observation Products Public Comments and Answers OGC 11-111 

 

2 

    

Copyright © 2012 Open Geospatial Consortium 
 

1.1.1.1 Revised comment 

After various conversations with Lockheed staff and the Order SWG, the main issue to be 
resolved has to do with the positioning of the Order Interface specification, especially in 
terms of procurement language.  

There is also the issue that existing profiles of the Order Interface are for civilian 
satellites only and has not been implemented for classified (military and intelligence) 
assets.  

Therefore, it is suggested some wording changes that will address the Lockheed 
concerns. One is to change the wording of the preface. In many ways, the Order Service 
spec is like the Catalogue Spec. Application profiles, such as Cat-EbRim, are what 
deployed applications use and procurement language specifies. They do not use or 
specify the framework (the actual Catalogue standard). 

Preface 

This  OGC™ standard specifies the interfaces, bindings, requirements, conformance 
classes, and a framework for implementing application profiles that enable complete 
workflows for ordering Earth Observation (EO) data products. Implementation of 
this standard requires development of application profiles that support specific EO 
platforms, such as a specific satellite or airborne sensor. Therefore, this standard shall 
not be specified in procurement language unless the procurement is to develop a new 
Order Interface application profile for a given EO platform. Procurement language 
shall be for specific EO platforms, such as "An Order Interface for the MODIS 
satellite" 

This document expands on the work presented in “Best Practices for Earth 
Observation Products” OGC-05-057r4, separating the order services from the 
catalogue services which have been presented in 06-079 and in 06-131. The final 
goal of the work was agreement on a coherent set of interfaces for ordering of EO 
products to support access to data from heterogeneous systems dealing with derived 
data products from satellite based measurements of the earth’s surface and 
environment.  

The content contained in this standard was originally based on the work of the 
European Space Agency (ESA), the Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (CNES) and 
SPOT Image performed in the context of an interoperability experiment performed 
using the ESA service support environment [SSE] that resulted in an internal 
specification called EOLIXML [EOLI-XML]. This EOLI-XML specification was 
extended to support an order interface subsequently adopted by ESA for online 
ordering from their catalogue. 



Ordering Services for Earth Observation Products Public Comments and Answers OGC 11-111 

 

Copyright © 2012 Open Geospatial Consortium 3 
 

Subsequently, based on Member and community feedback as well as continued work 
in the European Heterogeneous Missions Accessibility (HMA) activity 
(http://earth.esa.int/hma/), the order interface specification was made more generic 
and the Catalogue aspects were separated into another document. In 2006, the 
revision to the specification was then re-submitted (and briefed again) to the OGC 
Members. In mid 2007, there was a motion to release this specification as an OGC 
Best Practice document. By this time, the specification had been implemented by a 
number of organizations in the European satellite community. In July, 2007 this 
document was posted as an OGC Best Practice document. 

 

Scope  

This OGC™ standard describes the interfaces, bindings, requirements, conformance 
classes, and a framework required to implement platform specific order applications 
for Earth Observation (EO) products in a heterogeneous, distributed environment. 

 

And finally, it is suggested to change the title to reflect that the Order Service candidate 
standard is a framework for developing application profiles and cannot be used "out of 
the box":  

"A model for defining Earth Observation Order Service Application Profiles" 

 

1.1.2 OSEO SWG Answers 

The SWG does not agree that the Order Service Candidate is not an actual protocol, but a 
framework for defining application profiles that needs to be implemented in order to have 
a functional specification. In fact the candidate standard is flexible and has been already 
implemented in a number of projects. The SWG agrees that an improvement on Preface 
and Scope has to be done and the following is our proposal: 

Preface 

This  OGC™ standard specifies the interfaces, bindings, requirements, conformance 
classes, and a framework for implementing extensions that enable complete 
workflows for ordering of Earth Observation (EO) data products. In fact it provides 
the interfaces for supporting the following EO Product ordering scenarios: 

 Ordering products from EO Catalogues 



Ordering Services for Earth Observation Products Public Comments and Answers OGC 11-111 

 

4 

    

Copyright © 2012 Open Geospatial Consortium 
 

 Subscribing to automatic delivery of EO products 

 Bulk EO Product orders 

 Ordering of future products 

The EO products orders can be delivered in several different ways: 

 On media via mail 

 On file via different online protocols (e.g. ftp, sftp, ftps, etc.) 

 Online via online data access protocols (e.g. WCS, WMS, etc.) 

The ordered items can be customized in detail, one by one or altogether, via the 
processing options and scene selection options. These options are dynamically 
discovered and set from the clients by calling appropriate Ordering Services 
operations. This specification includes a comprehensive list of processing (20 
product order options listed in Table 7-6 and 3 subscription options listed in Table 7-
7) and scene selection options (14 scene options listed in Table 7-9) derived on the 
basis of inputs from several Satellite Agencies and Operators: 

 ESA 

 EUMETSAT 

 CNES 

 DLR 

 CSA 

 SPOT Image 

In case these already identified options are not sufficient for the specific mission, 
they can be extended following the SWE Common 2.0 framework. 

Due to the number of supported ordering scenarios, covering different and also 
alternative needs, then a number of Requirements Classes have been defined 
collecting the specific requirements a conformant implementation has to comply 
with. In parallel a number of Conformance Classes have been defined regrouping all 
tests a server has to pass for claiming the compliance with the corresponding 



Ordering Services for Earth Observation Products Public Comments and Answers OGC 11-111 

 

Copyright © 2012 Open Geospatial Consortium 5 
 

Requirement Class. A server can comply with some Requirement Classes, it is not 
required to implement all classes. 

Procurement Agencies and implementers shall be aware that: 

 Not all scenarios (Requirement Classes) shall be implemented, but only the 
Core one plus the others that are necessary for their use cases (see §2). 
However a server has to specify the supported Conformance Classes as 
evidence of the provided functionality. 

 If order options are supported, then the implementation has to use a sub-set of 
the already identified ones unless they are not fitting with their needs; in that 
case an application profile listing the new ones, to be modeled with SWE 
Common 2.0, has to be defined and implemented. 

 The standard has “extension” points that allows to add XML elements in the 
EO Product order payload. These elements are not necessary for the basic 
functionality of the specification, but can be used for accommodating 
implementation specific needs and then allowing the definition of 
“extensions”. 

This document expands on the work presented in “Best Practices for Earth 
Observation Products” OGC-05-057r4, separating the order services from the 
catalogue services which have been presented in 06-079 and in 06-131. The final 
goal of the work was agreement on a coherent set of interfaces for ordering of EO 
products to support access to data from heterogeneous systems dealing with derived 
data products from satellite based measurements of the earth’s surface and 
environment.  

 

Regarding the title, the following update is proposed: 

Ordering Services Framework for Earth Observation Products Interface Standard 

 

1.2 Herring, John (Oracle USA) No vote 

1.2.1 Comment 

The Order Service Specification (06-141r5) may technically be correct, but as a standard, 
it is disorganized and difficult to read and understand. This will probably lead to some 
level of confusion during implementation, conformance test development and again in 



Ordering Services for Earth Observation Products Public Comments and Answers OGC 11-111 

 

6 

    

Copyright © 2012 Open Geospatial Consortium 
 

testing. There are 17 conformance classes, making it possible to "satisfy" the standard in 
17 different ways. While it is not uncommon to have a number of different options, there 
really is no technical argument nor business case given as to why this list was decided 
upon. In particular, this draft standard does not meet OGC Policy on modular structure 
[08-131r3 -- The Specification Model - A Standard for Modular specifications; in 
particular Req 6: The requirements shall be grouped together in clauses (numbered 
sections) of the document in a strictly hierarchical manner, consistent with requirements 
modules and requirements classes, page 14] and may become a bad example to others 
trying to pass standards not directly developed in the OGC without making them fit the 
OGC policy. This also partially defeats the policy's intent to "smooth-out" later 
implementation and testing. Fixing this problem would require that the document be 
reorganized so that each requirements class is completely described in its own separate 
clause. In the introduction of that clause it would be reasonable to descibe the business 
case for the separation of the functionalty into separate modules. 

1.2.2 OSEO SWG Answers 

In the following the SWG answer is reported including in red the further answer from 
ORACLE. 

The Order Service candidate standard has a long history in the OGC and was developed 
by a number of OGC Member organizations and currently is implemented and use by a 
number of OGC Members and non-Members.  

The Order Service specification was first submitted and briefed to the OGC Membership 
in 2005. From 05-057: 

This document is based on the work of the European Space Agency (ESA), the 
Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales (CNES) and SPOT Image performed in the 
context of an interoperability experiment performed using the ESA service support 
environment [SSE] that resulted in an internal specification called EOLIXML [EOLI-
XML]. This EOLI-XML specification was extended to support an order interface 
subsequently adopted by ESA for online ordering from their catalogue. 

Subsequently, based on Member feedback as well as continued work in the European 
(with input from Canada and Japan) Heterogeneous Missions Accessibility activity 
(http://earth.esa.int/hma/), the order interface specification was made more generic and 
the Catalogue aspects were separated into another document. In 2006, the revision to the 
specification was then re-submitted (and briefed again) to the OGC Members. In mid 
2007, there was a motion to release this specification as an OGC Best Practice document. 
By this time, the specification had been implemented by a number of organizations in the 
European satellite community. In July 2007 this document was posted as an OGC Best 
Practice document. 



Ordering Services for Earth Observation Products Public Comments and Answers OGC 11-111 

 

Copyright © 2012 Open Geospatial Consortium 7 
 

In November 2009, an Ordering Services for Earth Observation Standards Working 
Group was formed. There was a general call for participation. Please note that the SWG 
was formed 10 months before the Modular Spec policy went into effect. 

ORACLE> That means that the SWG was formed after the Modular Spec was 
passed, since it contained its own "grandfather clause" allowing for a 12 month 
grace period. That means that the SWG should have been aware that if they did 
not submit before the end of the grace period then they would be subject to its 
requirements. The applicability of the policy is determined by the candidate 
submission date, not by the SWF formation/charter date.  

Secondly, the issue is not it being consistent with the Modular Spec as much as it 
is logically poorly organized. As said in the comment, the technical content of the 
candidate standard was not directly called into question, as much as its 
disorganized presentation and therefore its understandability.   

The SWG worked on the candidate standard for some time. In January 2011, the 
candidate standard was released for the 30-day mandatory public comment period. All 
comments received were processed and as required the document was edited to reflect the 
input provided during the comment period. 

Regarding the statement about the difficulty of reading and understanding the candidate 
standard, this is a personal opinion. 

ORACLE> All opinion is personal, both mine and yours. "Difficulty" is opinion, 
but "disorganized" is empirical. That "disorganized" leads to "difficult" is 
statistically supported theory.   

Regarding the statement, “lead to some level of confusion during implementation, 
conformance test development the level of confusing during the implementation”, please 
note that there is already an OSEO V1.0.0 reference implementation and the ETS. You 
can find the reference implementation and related supporting material on Source Forge: 
(http://sourceforge.net/projects/opgw/files/OPGW/5.1/). 

ORACLE> If the candidate standard postdates the implementation, then the 
argument that the candidate standard is sufficient to set requirements for new 
implementations is not supportable. A reference implementation is not a 
replacement for nor evidence of a sufficient candidate standard.  

Regarding the current set of 17 conformance classes: these conformance classes represent 
precisely identified functions to which an implementation may wish to comply with.  

ORACLE> The objection is not the content nor number of conformance classes, 
but their lack of technically sufficient descriptions that would lead to a rational 



Ordering Services for Earth Observation Products Public Comments and Answers OGC 11-111 

 

8 

    

Copyright © 2012 Open Geospatial Consortium 
 

understanding of why these classed and not others; of why an implementer would 
choose any of these.  The descriptions below are still inadequate, but the 
candidate standard does not seem even to contain these or their equivalents. 
Again, this is a presentation issue, but this time it is linked to a lack of informative 
content in support of the normative descriptions.  

They are many classes because there are many options in the ordering process. Some 
examples: 

 Quotation: 
◦ Some Satellite operators are not interested in this function at all (e.g. ESA, 

DLR), whereas some commercial missions are. [Furthermore,] if someone 
wants just to exchange PDF documents with the customer (e.g. MDA – 
Radarsat mission), others might be interested in having an online service. 

 Order Options: 
◦ ESA provides to its users many scene selection options (e.g. by strip, by fixed 

scenes, by floating scenes, …); other commercial missions like Rapid Eye do 
not provide any scene selection: you can get only what they have in the 
archive – no customization. 

 Delivery Options: 
◦ Different operators have different needs e.g.: up to now ESA delivered 

products basically by media; newer missions are instead switching to online 
download or also to online access via e.g. WCS. 

 Cancellation: 
◦ Only a few missions are able to support order cancellation, then a dedicated 

class has been defined for those instead providing this function. 
Additionally the SWG understands that the current document structure was discussed in 
the OAB in October of last year and an updated document was sent to OAB for review in 
November of last year.  Much of the OAB guidance was incorporated into the current 
version of the document. 

ORACLE> Being a member of the OAB, I was present at the discussion,  and will 
freely admit that we made a grave error and not requiring a resubmission of the 
"fixed" version of the candidate.  I doubt that we will make that mistake again.  

In conclusion any technical errors (and in your comment I haven't seen any technical 
issue) shall be corrected but the document will not be restructured. Any significant re-
structuring of the document will occur in the next revision of the standard. 

ORACLE> Lack of complete and organized documentation is an extreme 
technical issue.  



Ordering Services for Earth Observation Products Public Comments and Answers OGC 11-111 

 

Copyright © 2012 Open Geospatial Consortium 9 
 

1.2.2.1 Conclusion 

The SWG agrees to implement the “Structural Part” of ORACLE comments in the next 
revision of the Standard. 

 

1.3 de La Beaujardiere, Jeff (US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 
(NOAA) No vote 

1.3.1 Comment 

The comment has been posted on the Web at the following address: 

https://geo-
ide.noaa.gov/wiki/index.php?title=Comments_on_OGC_Ordering_Service 

for reader’s convenience the comment has been reported below.  

Additionally, since it regroups several points, then the comment has been slightly 
reformatted by numbering the different issues. 

 

NOAA comments (2011-08-31) on OGC document #06-141r6, "Ordering Services for 
Earth Observation Products Interface Standard." 

Although this specification is potentially relevant to NOAA, in particular for ordering 
satellite data products that are not immediately available on spinning disk, NOAA votes 
No for the reasons below. 

Major issues: 

1. This specification should include diagrams or text explaining the role of this 
service within the overall architectural context of OGC Web Services. Does this 
spec define an Ordering Service that could be layered over existing OGC services 
that do not provide ordering capabilities (WCS, WMS, SOS)? Or does this spec 
define an end-to-end service that includes product generation and description 
functions analogous to WCS GetCoverage and DescribeCoverage? 

2. The definition of "Earth Observation Product" is incomplete, and must be made 
very explicit because it is a core aspect of the specification.  

a. Does a single satellite scene count as a product?  

b. What about a swath?  



Ordering Services for Earth Observation Products Public Comments and Answers OGC 11-111 

 

10 Copyright © 2012 Open Geospatial Consortium 
 

c. What about a global mosaic?  

d. Or a time series of all scenes that include a selected location?  

e. Is it possible to produce subsets of a single scene, or to stitch multiple 
scenes and then subset a bounding box from that?  

f. Are all of the following considered Products: Raw Data Records (RDRs), 
Sensor Data Records (SDRs), Temperature Data Records (TDRs), 
Deliverable Intermediate Products (IPs), Environmental Data Records 
(EDRs), Application Related Products (ARPs)?  

g. Is data from an in situ sensor an EO Product? 

3. The essential information that this is a SOAP service should be mentioned much 
earlier than p.94. 

4. Please add material summarizing implementation experience.  

a. Does this service represent entirely new functionality that has never been 
implemented, or does it codify services already in existence at the 
submitting organizations?  

b. If services already exist, do they implement all of the conformance classes 
or only some?  

c. Is a reference implementation available?  

d. Clause E.3.2 says, "The Ordering Service described in this document has 
been successfully implemented in Java" -- this would be helpful 
information to provide much earlier to (a) give confidence to other TC 
members that a "Yes" vote is warranted and (b) give hope to potential 
implementers that they need not start from scratch to implement this 294-
page specification.  

Editorial comments: 

5. The Requirement Classes could be presented much more readably. A phrase like 
"specifies the requirements an Order Server shall implement" is repeated in every 
item, and it would be better to focus the list on what functionality each class 
actually provides. 

6. Replace "has to" with "must" or "shall" throughout the document. 



Ordering Services for Earth Observation Products Public Comments and Answers OGC 11-111 

 

Copyright © 2012 Open Geospatial Consortium 11 
 

7. Should check the list of Abbreviations and delete terms used only 0 or 1 times, 
and add any missing terms. 

8. Either SOAP 1.1 is permitted or it is forbidden--this sentence contradicts the 
paragraph above and the reference to mandatory SOAP 1.2 in Clause 7.4. 

9. Does OGC require that this general information about UML (Clause 5.2) be 
included? If not, recommend deletion of these 3-4 pages. 

10. Does OGC require that this general information about XML schema notation 
(Clause 5.3) be included in every spec? If not, recommend deletion. 

11. I congratulate the Italian editor on his knowledge of English, which is molto 
meglio than my knowledge of Italian (I had to use Google Translate to get that 
last bit.) Nevertheless, a native speaker should review this document carefully and 
fix the spelling and grammar problems. 

1.3.2 OSEO SWG Answers 

1. Agreed to enhance the §6 including additional text describing the relationships 
between this spec and other OGC spec.  

Actually OSEO has relationships with: 

 WCS & WMS, which can be used as delivery options, allowing the users 
to access the products from the Web without the need of downloading the 
whole file. 

 SPS EO: in fact OSEO can be used together with SPS in order to issue 
orders for future products. 

 OGC 06-131, OGC 10-157r2: they are the companion Catalogue 
specifications. They provide the protocol for searching the EO products 
that can be ordered via the OSEO specification. 

 OWS, as all other OGC spec. 

2. Agreed. Section §4 reports a too short definition of EO Product and then it will be 
enhanced. Regarding all the questions raised on EO Product concepts, OSEO is 
rather agnostic with respect to the precise type of the product. In fact for OSEO 
spec a product is an item having an identifier in the catalogue, on which a set of 
processing, delivery and scene selection options can be applied. Then OSEO spec 
allows to order every product matching these requirements.  

a. Yes. To order a scene there are several options: 



Ordering Services for Earth Observation Products Public Comments and Answers OGC 11-111 

 

12 Copyright © 2012 Open Geospatial Consortium 
 

i. The EO Product catalogue stores already scenes, then the user search 
them and possibly order them directly  

ii. The EO Product catalogue stores strips, but the order service returns 
scene selection options asking to order scenes for that kind of 
products. 

b. Depends on the definition of swath. If you mean a long acquisition lasting 
several minutes / several orbits, then it is supported.  

c. Yes. As I said before: if the mosaic is a product which metadata is stored 
in the companion EO Product Catalogue it can be ordered. Probably it will 
have very specific options (or no options at all: I guess that once a mosaic 
has been built stitching plenty of products then it cannot be modified). 

d. Yes. That kind of order, named also bulk orders in other contexts, can be 
implemented using the “subscription order” concept. In this case the order 
item is the identifier of the collection from where the products have to be 
extracted plus several options specifying the area of interest and the time 
window. Additionally it is possible to specify “live subscription” in which 
the order is repeated periodically with certain frequency. 

e. Yes it is possible to extract a sub product from the parent one (via the 
scene selection options); No it is not possible to stitch and then cut on the 
specified area. This is a new scenario. Is that used by NOAA? 

f. Where are those terms defined? However, as I said before, everything 
which metadata can be inserted in a companion EO Product Catalogue and 
for which the ordering details can be represented via processing, scene 
selection and delivery options then it can be ordered via the OSEO. 

g. No 

3. Agreed, we can move in section §6, where a general introduction to the 
specification is reported. 

4.  

 A: it formalizes via an OGC spec the experience gathered in several ESA 
and non ESA projects. 

 B: there are several operational implementations of the previous spec 
(OGC 06-141r2 V0.9.4). The current one is a reviewed and improved 
version. 



Ordering Services for Earth Observation Products Public Comments and Answers OGC 11-111 

 

Copyright © 2012 Open Geospatial Consortium 13 
 

 C: Yes. Give a look here: 
http://sourceforge.net/projects/opgw/files/OPGW/5.1 

 D: Agreed, this section will be improved and a few references will be put 
either in the preface or in the section §6. 

5. Agreed, section §2 will be improved. 

6. Agreed, requirements sentences will be updated putting SHALL 

7. Any inputs are much appreciated. 

8. Agreed, any reference to SOAP V1.1 will be removed (previous implementations 
were all SOAP V1.1) 

9. Not agreed; notations help the reader. 

10. Not agreed; notations help the reader. 

11. We have done our best; unfortunately we don’t have a native English speaker in 
the team. Volunteers are very welcome! 

 

 


