
  
 

Open Geospatial Consortium 
Publication Date: 2014-11-12 

Approval Date: 2014-09-19 

Posted Date: 2014-08-25 

Reference number of this document: OGC 14-086r1 

Reference URL for this document: http://www.opengis.net/doc/PER/AAtSH_Summary 

Category: Public Engineering Report 

Editors: Josh Lieberman, Johannes Echterhoff, Matt de Ris, George Wilber 

OGC® Aircraft Access to SWIM (AAtS) Harmonization 
Architecture Report 

 
Copyright © 2014 Open Geospatial Consortium 

To obtain additional rights of use, visit http://www.opengeospatial.org/legal/. 
 
 

Warning 

This document is not an OGC Standard. This document is an OGC Public 
Engineering Report created as a deliverable in an OGC Interoperability Initiative 
and is not an official position of the OGC membership. It is distributed for review 
and comment. It is subject to change without notice and may not be referred to as 
an OGC Standard. Further, any OGC Engineering Report should not be referenced 
as required or mandatory technology in procurements.  

 

 

  

Document type:  OGC® Engineering Report 
Document subtype: NA 
Document stage:  Approved for public release 
Document language:  English 



OGC 14-086r1 

ii Copyright © 2014 Open Geospatial Consortium 
 

Preface 

The FAA’s Aircraft Access to System Wide Information Management (AAtS) initiative 
is in its evolutionary stages of requirements and standards development. Its goal is to 
provide aircraft connectivity to the FAA’s System Wide Information Manager (SWIM) 
infrastructure to communicate/share aviation data and services. This connectivity will 
establish a common operating picture between the flight deck and air traffic control for 
collaborative strategic decision-making.  Distribution of the vast amount of operational 
information, such as aviation information (AI), meteorological (MET) and air traffic 
management (ATM), needed to support the safe movement of aircraft during all phases of 
flight in the National Airspace System (NAS) will increase capacity, efficiency, and 
result in more timely departures and arrivals.  

Similarly, there are a number of aviation standards in development by a variety of 
industry groups and committees (i.e., the RTCA Special Committee 206 (SC-206), 
ARINC 830 Aircraft/Ground Information Exchange (AGIE), and Open Geospatial 
Consortium (OGC) standards) that are also pursuing the development of requirements 
and standards to leverage ground based aviation related information and data networking 
technology to support the operation of aircraft. 

FAA and the aviation industry are moving towards consensus that electronic distribution 
of operational data and technical information will increase the NAS/airline productivity 
and efficiency and deliver a more positive passenger experience both domestically and 
internationally. However, there is a need to encourage harmonization of all of these 
efforts since the aforementioned aviation committees also represent global interests.  

The AAtS Harmonization project has carried out a number of activities with the goals of 

 Identifying and analyzing differences in requirements/standards undertaken by 
SC-206, AGIE, and OGC; 

 Analyzing draft standards and recommending changes during SC-206 and AGIE 
standards development to improve harmonization prospects 

 Developing a harmonized architecture within which SC-206, AGIE, and OGC 
standards complement one another to improve aircraft-ground communications 

This document summarizes activities carried out during the AAtS Harmonization project. 
A companion document (OGC 14-073) describes the harmonized architecture that was 
developed during the project.  

 

  



OGC 14-086r1 

Copyright © 2014 Open Geospatial Consortium iii 
 

Executive Summary 

Background 

The FAA’s Systems Engineering, NAS Architecture organization sponsored an effort to 
harmonize industry standards with the Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) as the lead. 
The effort was organized with a small core team responsible for developing strategy and 
products, and a larger industry wide team providing inputs, cross-industry perspectives 
and expertise in the industry standard efforts. Core team members were: FAA AAtS, 
OGC, Boeing, Panasonic, and North Star. Other key contributors were members of the 
AAtS Harmonization tiger team (see Annex A). 

Tasks and Accomplishments 

Project work focused on harmonizing AAtS with RTCA SC-206 (architecture and 
requirements), ARINC 830 Air Ground Information Exchange (AGIE) and OGC 
standards. Initial harmonization tasks included: 

1. Analyzing existing standards; 
2. Analyzing and shaping emerging standards; 
3. Developing a harmonized architecture that addresses the functional requirements;  
4. Formulating conclusions and recommendations to: 

a. update existing standards in order to address identified harmonization 
issues 

b. support decision processes of policy makers, government, and industry. 

One of the major challenges of AAtS Harmonization revolves around emergent and 
existing standards from multiple organizations with differing priorities. These 
organizations naturally develop standards to address technical and operational priorities 
for their own stakeholder needs and from their own perspective. Project participants 
analyzed the purpose, scope, and overlap space of each standard or package of standards 
specifically from the perspective of the AAtS concept, giving special attention to 
standards representing conflicted priorities, interfaces, or operational services.  

The harmonized architecture defines areas of overlaps and gaps defined by the standards 
intended uses, end user applications and key business requirements. The architecture 
defines interface areas and provides a view of a layered architecture that shows where the 
different applications, services and middleware functions interact and where out-of-scope 
but adjacent critical functions fit. In this layered view, AAtS and SC-206 standards 
provide both unique application-specific functionality and reusable middleware-services 
infrastructure. In the context of AAtS, use of AGIE and OGC standards falls mainly into 
the reusable infrastructure layer 

The architecture is also described in a system level view with nominal component 
topologies laid out between the information sources and consumers. These leverage AAtS 
SWIM extensions to SC-206 air-ground functions via a harmonized cross-domain ground 



OGC 14-086r1 

iv Copyright © 2014 Open Geospatial Consortium 
 

infrastructure and AGIE’s client-server features. The architecture describes key 
functional features that are common across the standards and where they might be 
allocated to provide an efficient and harmonized implementation. Key common 
requirements as well as conflicting ones are also identified. 

Successful harmonization was achieved not only by architectural innovation, but also by 
the team’s efforts to influence the course of standards themselves during the project. Due 
to these efforts, the SC-206 and AAtS architectures are now more compatible and the 
AGIE standard is more compatible with both AAtS and SC-206.  

Harmonization Impacts 

This effort made critical impacts on several industry activities: 

1. The ARINC 830 (AGIE) standard was modified to build in air traffic management 
functionality and meet ATM requirements. 

2. The AAtS architecture was mapped directly to the RTCA SC-206 architecture and 
the AAtS Implementation Guidance Document (IGD) updated accordingly in v3.0 
(harmonization phase 1). 

3. The RTCA DO-349 recommendations standard was edited to be more inclusive of 
larger industry concepts 

4. Further, inputs and recommendations to the AAtS IGD will bring IGD v4.0 more 
in line with global industry needs and objectives (harmonization phase 2). 

5. The harmonized architecture defined by industry efforts in this project will impact 
how SC-206, AGIE and OGC concepts and requirements fit in the AAtS 
architecture and business proposition in upcoming development efforts. 

6. The AAtS prototype/demonstration document provides an outline and blueprint 
for building a proof-of-concept framework to show how AAtS can function in an 
integrated airline-defined solution. 

Conclusions and Recommendations 

The goal of the project to “harmonize standards and concepts within the AAtS trade 
space” was accomplished through outreach to and coordination in project activities 
amongst multiple standards team members from representative industry stakeholders. 
Project activities led to the following conclusions and recommendations in addition to 
those specific to the harmonized architecture that are presented in OGC document 
14-073.  

Project Conclusions 

1. There is a missed opportunity to realize the full value of AAtS and the capabilities 
of services based off of NAS service / SWIM sourcing.  

2. The value proposition for industry to implement AAtS is lacking.  
3. Industry faces inherent uncertainty and risk in implementing products for AAtS as 

defined due to potentially incompatible approaches being taken for air-ground 



OGC 14-086r1 

Copyright © 2014 Open Geospatial Consortium v 
 

information exchange elsewhere in the world. Global interoperability and 
therefore a global market is far from a given.  

4. A harmonized architecture based on AAtS with SC-206, AGIE and OGC 
standards is achievable and provides a framework for deploying AAtS in a multi-
domain solution. 

5. Harmonization across these three standards in the AAtS architecture allows the 
benefits of the capabilities from each standard to be realized in a consistent 
implementation.  

6. The AAtS architecture as defined in IGD v3.0 is too constraining to fully reflect 
the capabilities and benefits of the harmonized architecture. 

Project Recommendations 

1. Recommend incorporation into future updates of the AAtS IGD of an enhanced 
and broader architecture and environment based on the harmonization team 
review comments and recommendations. 

2. Recommend the development and testing of a harmonized solution (prototype). 
3. Recommend follow-on harmonization efforts to include other key industry 

standards. 
4. Recommend follow on harmonization efforts to define global interoperability and 

interaction with other global efforts 
5. Recommend that the FAA develop an FAA-wide implementation plan to integrate 

AAtS to other elements within the NAS to bring near term value to aircraft 
operators 

 

 



OGC 14-086r1 

vi Copyright © 2014 Open Geospatial Consortium 
 

Contents Page 

1	   Introduction ..............................................................................................................1	  
1.1	   Purpose & Objective ...........................................................................................1	  
1.2	   Scope ...................................................................................................................1	  
1.3	   Document contributor contact points ..................................................................2	  
1.4	   Revision history ...................................................................................................2	  
1.5	   Future work .........................................................................................................2	  
1.6	   Foreword .............................................................................................................3	  

2	   References ................................................................................................................3	  

3	   Summary and chronology of Activities and Products .............................................3	  
4	   Request for Information and Community Workshop ..............................................4	  

5	   Standards Harmonization Outreach .........................................................................6	  
6	   Prototype Outline .....................................................................................................7	  

7	   Harmonized Architecture .........................................................................................7	  
8	   ICAO Working Paper ..............................................................................................8	  

9	   Conclusions and Recommendations ........................................................................8	  
Annex A: Participants ........................................................................................................11	  

Bibliography ......................................................................................................................13	  
  



OGC 14-086r1 

Copyright © 2014 Open Geospatial Consortium vii 
 

Figures Page 
Figure 1. OWS-9 Aviation Architecture, including prototype Data Management Service 

(DMS) 6	  

Figure 3 – FAA/NAS AAtS Architecture in Global or International Context (from OGC 14-
073) 8	  

 





OGC® Public Engineering Report OGC 14-086r1 

 

Copyright © 2014 Open Geospatial Consortium 1 
 

OGC® Aircraft Access to SWIM (AAtS) Harmonization 
Architecture Report 

1 Introduction 

1.1 Purpose & Objective 

The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and industry are moving toward consensus 
that electronic distribution of operational data and technical information will improve 
shared situational awareness (SSA), increase National Airspace System (NAS) efficiency 
and deliver a more positive passenger experience both domestically and internationally.  
With that comes the need to identify harmonization opportunities across multiple 
standardization efforts. The purpose of the AAtS Harmonization activity has been to 
leverage the strengths of distinct but related standardization efforts in order to improve 
the scope, scale, and interoperability of aircraft-ground data communications under the 
auspices of the FAA AAtS concept and program. 

The objective of this document is to summarize the range of events and products that 
have characterized the harmonization effort beyond the development of the harmonized 
architecture itself. 

1.2 Scope 

This OGC® document summarizes the Aircraft Access to SWIM (AAtS) Harmonization 
activity developed by a team funded by the FAA and led by the Open Geospatial 
Consortium (OGC). The activity involved assembling a core team of industry participant 
experts to analyze and harmonize four standards suites and/or standards-based 
architectures relevant to air-ground information exchange: 

 The Aircraft Access to SWIM (AAtS) concept,  
 RTCA aeronautical information services (AIS) and meteorological (MET) 

information data link service committee’s (SC-206) concepts and standards,  
 Air-Ground Information Exchange A830 (AGIE) standard and  
 OGC standards and architectural perspectives.  

Elements of this effort have included: 

 Creation and public release of a Request for Information 
 Analysis of the fits and overlaps between the four standards suites 
 Engagement with ongoing standards development efforts to reduce 

incompatibilities 



OGC 14-086r1 

2 

    

Copyright © 2014 Open Geospatial Consortium 
 

 Creation of a broader industry “Tiger team” to review and provide feedback on 
activities and outcomes 

 Development of a harmonized system architecture 
 Creation and delivery of documentation for a harmonized AAtS prototype 
 Creation of a working paper and presentation for submission to ICAO 

1.3 Document contributor contact points 

All questions regarding this document should be directed to the editor or the contributors: 

Name Organization 
George Percivall Open Geospatial Consortium 
Johannes Echterhoff interactive instruments GmbH 
Joshua Lieberman Tumbling Walls 
Matt de Ris Panasonic Avionics Corporation 
Rick Wilber Boeing 

 

1.4 Revision history 

Date Release Editor Primary 
clauses 

modified 

Description 

August 15, 
2014 

0.1 Joshua 
Lieberman 

All First complete draft from material previously 
in architecture report 

August 25, 
2014 

0.5 Joshua 
Lieberman 

All Response and update following August F2F 
meeting 

September 
3, 2014 

0.6 Joshua 
Lieberman 

Various Editorial updates 

 

1.5 Future work 

In the course of carrying out the AAtS Harmonization activity, a number of opportunities 
for valuable follow-on activities were identified:  

 Testing and validation of the recommended AAtS architecture through one or 
more prototyping activities; 

 Extension of harmonization down into lower architectural layers (transport, data 
link); 

 International outreach and harmonization with other SWIM and AAtS systems 
that are being designed and developed; 

 Development of business value propositions for additional stakeholders (for 
example, value for aircraft operators); 

 Identification and development of additional use cases for aircraft-ground 
communications; and 



OGC 14-086r1 

Copyright © 2014 Open Geospatial Consortium 3 
 

 Development and testing of additional OGC standards and standard profiles 
relating specifically to aviation and AAtS, such as a Data Management Services 
(DMS) specification. 

 Continued outreach via the harmonization tiger team to ensure industry 
participation in AAtS evolution, such as defining inputs to future versions of 
AAtS IGD, presentation and message-to-industry activities (RTCA, AEEC 
executive committee (SAI), and other relevant activities. 

1.6 Foreword 

Attention is drawn to the possibility that some of the elements of this document may be 
the subject of patent rights. The Open Geospatial Consortium shall not be held 
responsible for identifying any or all such patent rights. 

Recipients of this document are requested to submit, with their comments, notification of 
any relevant patent claims or other intellectual property rights of which they may be 
aware that might be infringed by any implementation of the standard set forth in this 
document, and to provide supporting documentation. 

2 References 

The following documents are referenced in this document. For dated references, 
subsequent amendments to, or revisions of, any of these publications do not apply. For 
undated references, the latest edition of the normative document referred to applies. 

 ARINC 830 Air/Ground Information Exchange (AGIE) 

 FAA Aircraft Access to SWIM (AAtS) Implementation Guidance Document (IGD) 
v3.0 

 FAA Aircraft Access to SWIM (AAtS) Concept of Operations (ConOps) v1.0 

 RTCA DO-340 Concept of Use for Aeronautical Information Services (AIS) and 
Meteorological (MET) Data Link Services 

 RTCA DO-349 Architecture Recommendations for Aeronautical Information (AI) 
and Meteorological (MET) Data Link Services 

 OGC Document 14-073 AAtS Harmonization Architecture Report 

3 Summary and chronology of Activities and Products 

The OGC AAtS Harmonization project conducted these major events and activities: 

 2013-07-01: Project Start 
 2013-09-23:  Request for Information (RFI) announced via press release 
 2013-10-01:  RFI Information Webinar  



OGC 14-086r1 

4 

    

Copyright © 2014 Open Geospatial Consortium 
 

 2013-12-17/18:  Community Workshop, Washington (Tiger Team meeting #1) 
 2013-12-25:   First draft of AAtS Harmonization Report 
 2014-01-09:  Workshop feedback (on Survey Monkey) 
 2014-03-14: First draft of Prototype Architecture  
 2014-04-10/11: Tiger Team meeting #2 
 2014-04-22: First Draft of ICAO White Paper 
 2014-05-19: Prototype architecture and ROM transmitted to FAA 
 2014-07-30/31:  Tiger Team meeting #3 
 2014-08-29:  All project deliverables complete 

The project produced these major deliverables that were transmitted to FAA and / or 
released publicly: 

 “Request for Information (RFI) for Guidance on AAtS Standards Harmonization,”  
RFI Issuance Date: 23 September 2013 

 “AAtS Prototype Outline” delivered 19 May 2014. 
 “AAtS Harmonization Architecture Report” – OGC document 14-073 
 “AAtS Harmonization Project Summary – this document 
 “AAtS Harmonization ICAO Working Paper,” to be published by 30 September 

2014. 

Presentation materials for the events listed above were also produced and distributed to 
team members and participating organizations. 

4 Request for Information and Community Workshop 

A Request for Information (RFI) was released by OGC on 23 September 2013 and was 
intended to engage the community in identifying standards efforts relevant to the 
provision of aircraft connectivity to the FAA’s SWIM infrastructure to 
communicate/share aviation data and services, as planned in the FAA’s Aircraft Access 
to System Wide Information Management (AAtS) initiative. 

The RFI was supported by the following organizations in addition to OGC: 

The FAA’s Aircraft Access to System Wide Information Management (AAtS) 
initiative aims to provide aircraft connectivity to the FAA’s SWIM infrastructure to 
communicate/share aviation data and services in order to establish a common operating 
environment between the flight deck, air traffic management, and AOC/FOC (Airline / 
Flight Operations Communication) for collaborative strategic decision-making.   

The RTCA Special Committee (SC) 206 (http://www.rtca.org) develops technology 
agnostic concepts, architectures, and requirement standards to define Aeronautical 
Information Services (AIS) and Meteorological (MET) Data Link Services to and from 
aircraft in support of future air traffic management concepts. 



OGC 14-086r1 

Copyright © 2014 Open Geospatial Consortium 5 
 

The ARINC AGIE/MAGIC subcommittee (http://www.aviation-ia.com/aeec/)leads 
ARINC Project Paper 830 - Aircraft/Ground Information Exchange, establishing a 
standard for a non-proprietary application level information interchange framework. This 
includes protocols, functions, and interfaces that enable application-to-application 
information exchange between aircraft and ground applications in a universal manner. 

Organizations responding to this RFI contributed information on: 

- Technologies, standards and general trends relevant to AAtS 

- Practical recommendations on harmonization opportunities and challenges 

- Insights on how to best craft an interim path for the community and to develop a 
technical architecture that is forward thinking and can accommodate this 
emerging and evolving environment. 

- Global harmonization considerations  

Responses were received from WMO, Honeywell, and Harris Corporation. Information 
provided in the RFI responses guided the discussion at a community workshop held 17-
18 December 2013 in Washington DC. The workshop also built on aviation information 
exchange work done in OGC Web Services (OWS) Testbeds 9 and 10.  

Workshop discussion topics included: 

 Use cases and intended uses for AAtS 
 Information flow between and within air and ground systems 
 Key AAtS requirements 

Material on AGIE, SC-206, and OGC standards were also presented. The workshop 
commenced AAtS standards architecture analysis and harmonization work as well as 
increased engagement with relevant standards groups. 



OGC 14-086r1 

6 

    

Copyright © 2014 Open Geospatial Consortium 
 

 

Figure 1. OWS-9 Aviation Architecture, including prototype Data Management Service (DMS) 

 

5 Standards Harmonization Outreach 
Members of the AAtS Harmonization activity core team engaged with the following 
standards development groups in order to improve the prospects for harmonization of the 
various standards suites: 

 ARINC 830 (AGIE) was materially altered to include concepts that allowed 
alignment with the architecture being put together by RTCA SC206.  

 RTCA SC206’s DO-349 was edited heavily with input from participants 
developing A830 to include broader data link architectural topologies and 
concepts resulting in significant changes to the basis of future work for that group 

 IGD v3.0 was materially changed, anticipating significant changes in v4.0 

 



OGC 14-086r1 

Copyright © 2014 Open Geospatial Consortium 7 
 

6 Prototype Outline and Plan 

The AAtS Harmonization team delivered to FAA a prototype outline and comprehensive 
plan describing a harmonized AAtS system prototype and demonstration. The document 
provides prototype and demonstration objectives, along with purpose and approach. It 
contains detailed descriptions of topology, components, demonstration scenarios and 
scripts, along with conceptual data definitions and operator interactions. 

7 Harmonized Architecture 

The AAtS Harmonization team produced an engineering report on the developed 
harmonized architectures (OGC document 14-073). This report focuses on the 
harmonization of AAtS as described in FAA IGD v3.0 with RTCA SC-206 (architecture 
and requirements), ARINC 830 Air Ground Information Exchange (AGIE) and OGC 
standards. Harmonization tasks included: 

1. Analyzing and shaping existing as well as emerging standards; 
2. Developing a harmonized architecture that addresses the functional requirements; 

and  
3. Formulating conclusions and recommendations to: 

a. address identified harmonization issues 
b. support decision processes of policy makers, government, and industry 

This report documents:  

 a harmonized architecture based upon concepts and standards from FAA AAtS, 
RTCA SC-206, ARINC 830 (AGIE) and OGC 

 a new, recommended, high-level system architecture that both updates and 
expands the scope of the harmonized architecture 

 



OGC 14-086r1 

8 

    

Copyright © 2014 Open Geospatial Consortium 
 

Figure 2 – FAA/NAS AAtS Architecture in Global or International Context (from OGC 14-073) 

8 ICAO Working Paper 

The AAtS Harmonization team has continued its outreach activities by distilling the 
results and recommendations of the project into a working paper for submission to ICAO, 
together with materials for a presentation to ICAO by FAA. The working paper proposes 
that a unified ICAO SWIM-aircraft connectivity position be developed based on the 
concepts and architecture developed in the AAtS Harmonization activity before the 
various solutions currently in development drift further far apart in their ability to 
efficiently interoperate. 

9 Conclusions and Recommendations 

The goal of the project to “harmonize standards and concepts within the AAtS trade 
space” was accomplished through outreach to and coordination in project activities 
amongst multiple standards team members from representative industry stakeholders. 
Project activities led to the following conclusions and recommendations in addition to 
those specific to the harmonized architecture that are presented in OGC document 
14-073.  

Project Conclusions1 

1. There is a missed opportunity to realize the full value of AAtS and the capabilities 
of services based off of NAS service/SWIM sourcing. As envisioned and 
supported by RTCA standards the AAtS architecture can support a range of 
criticalities. There is a perception within the FAA that if information is sourced 
from SWIM or it does not build or contract for the delivery system, then the end-
to-end system should not support higher critical uses. This perception is 
contradicted by existing commercial systems that can support safety critical 
functionality (e.g., RCP240/RSP180 oceanic and remote CPDLC and ADS-C). 
Additionally, both AGIE and SC-206 contain capabilities that can directly or 
indirectly support air traffic services (ATS) and communicate with the ACD. 

2. The value proposition for AAtS to the industry is lacking – Lack of information 
about services, lack of services with operational value, insufficient benefit 
definition of why SWIM based information services versus traditional sourcing 
makes the question of “why AAtS?” difficult to answer. There is an identified 
opportunity to make aircraft operators and general aircraft operations more 
efficient which cannot be realized without AAtS integration into the NAS 
systems.  

3. Uncertainty and inherent industry risk exists for implementing AAtS due to lack 
of global interoperability –Any commercial entity that intends to put AAtS into 

                                                

1 The last three conclusions are drawn from the Architecture Report (OGC 14-073) 



OGC 14-086r1 

Copyright © 2014 Open Geospatial Consortium 9 
 

practice will limit the number of technology stacks that must be implemented 
while maximizing its customer base and customer offering. There are other 
similar global efforts underway to define the SWIM connectivity options to 
aircraft. It is, currently, not at all certain that these other concepts will be 
interoperable with the FAA’s plan. This inherent risk, both technological as well 
as monetary, induces hesitancy in would-be AAtS implementers. 

4. A harmonized architecture based on AAtS with SC-206, AGIE and OGC 
standards is achievable and provides a framework for deploying AAtS in a multi-
domain solution. 

5. Harmonization across these three standards in the AAtS architecture allows the 
features of each standard to be implemented together in a consistent system.  

6. The AAtS architecture as defined in IGD v3.0 is too constraining and needs to be 
updated and expanded in v4.0.  

Project Recommendations2 

1. Recommend revision of the AAtS IGD v3.0 based on the team review comments 
and recommendations as well as the recommended system architecture presented 
in the architecture report. As discussed previously, the team has performed a 
detailed industry-based review of the guidance found in the AAtS IGD v3.0. 
Updated implementation guidance will provide value to all stakeholders involved 
in deploying an AAtS solution. The industry representatives within the team 
recommend the adoption and incorporation of team input that includes the 
following concepts: 

 Non-SWIM data sourcing inclusion in the architecture of AAtS 
 A role for safety critical applications within the AAtS trade space 
 Updates to the AAtS architecture to facilitate more recognizable industry 

business value and more achievable global interoperability 
2. Recommend development and testing of a prototype implementation of the 

harmonized architecture – a prototype is necessary to show industry value as well 
as technical readiness in a harmonized AAtS solution that leverages industry 
standards as well as to spur industry adoption. Prototyping efforts often lead to 
industry practices that motivate additional standards development. 

3. Recommend follow-on harmonization work covering additional industry 
standards – while the work performed under this effort was worthwhile and has 
resulted in significant progress towards achieving interoperable solutions, it 
cannot be considered complete or comprehensive across the industry or even the 
complete AAtS architecture. Within the constraints of a realistic budget, it is 
recommended that further work investigate harmonization issues with ARINC 
841 MIAM, ARINC 839 MAGIC, selected EFB standards, and others as 
recommended by the RFI workshop and Tiger Team participants. 

                                                

2 The first three recommendations are drawn from the Architecture Report (OGC 14-073) 



OGC 14-086r1 

10 Copyright © 2014 Open Geospatial Consortium 
 

4. Recommend follow-on harmonization with other global efforts – the FAA’s AAtS 
is the closest to implementation and as such should continue to embrace 
international leadership of the SWIM to aircraft concept paradigm. The 
differences between the potential approaches of other state aviation agencies 
indicate that on a long enough timeline, it is likely that the FAA’s current 
concepts may need to change or risk becoming non-interoperable. Harmonization 
includes: applications, intended uses, requirements, time lines, architectures, 
standards, and business models. 

5. Recommend FAA-developed FAA-wide implementation plan to integrate AAtS 
to other elements within the NAS to bring near term values to aircraft operators. 
This includes such items as:  

a. Align NAS Program Concept of Operations with AAtS Concept of 
Operations 

b. Integrating AAtS into the next NextGen Segment Implementation Plan 
(NSIP) Operational Improvements (OIs) based off of the uses described in 
the AAtS Concept of Operations. Details include: 

i. schedule 
ii. adequate funding 

iii. necessary capabilities 
c. Identifying the specific NAS programs that will leverage AAtS 

capabilities and integrating AAtS into their implementation plans 

It should be recognized that industry foresees a direct and high value potential for AAtS. 
In fact the industry believes the full capacity of operational functionality of AAtS is 
wider than currently envisaged. In order to achieve the perceived potential, further work 
is suggested. 



OGC 14-086r1 

Copyright © 2014 Open Geospatial Consortium 11 
 

Annex A: Participants 

Name Organization Role 

Allan Hart Honeywell TIGER Team 

Art Ahrens Harris Corporation Workshop Participant 

Dee Llewellyn Lockheed Martin Workshop Participant 

Ezra Jalleta MITRE Workshop Participant 

Farid Aknine North Star Group, LLC Core Team 

George Percivall Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc. Core Team 

George Wilber Boeing Core Team 

Johannes Echterhoff interactive instruments GmbH Core Team 

John Moore Jeppesen/Boeing TIGER Team 

John Pace North Star Group, LLC Core Team 

Joshua Lieberman Lieberman, Joshua Core Team 

Ken Gochenour Jeppesen/Boeing TIGER Team 

Kevin Niewoehner North Star Group, LLC Core Team 

Lockett Yee North Star Group, LLC Core Team 

Louis Toth Honeywell TIGER Team 

Luc Emberger Airbus Workshop Participant 

Matt de Ris Panasonic Avionics Corporation Core Team 

Nadine Alameh Open Geospatial Consortium Core Team 

Robert Klein FAA Core Team 

Sherry Yang Boeing ATM Workshop Participant 

Stuart Wilson Harris Corporation TIGER Team 



OGC 14-086r1 

12 Copyright © 2014 Open Geospatial Consortium 
 

Name Organization Role 

Trent Tinker Luciad Inc Workshop Participant 

Wolf Sonnenberg Teledyne Controls TIGER Team 

 



OGC 14-086r1 

Copyright © 2014 Open Geospatial Consortium 13 
 

Bibliography 

[1] ARINC 841 Media Independent Aircraft Messaging (MIAM) 

[2] ARINC 839 Manager of Air Ground Interface Communications (MAGIC) 

[3] ARINC 664, Part 5 Aircraft Data Network – Network Domain Characteristics 
and Interconnection 


