
  
 

 

Open Geospatial Consortium 
Publication Date: 2016-01-25 

Approval Date: 2015-09-17 

Posted Date: 2015-07-21 

Reference number of this document: OGC 15-051r3  

Reference URL for this document: http://www.opengis.net/doc/PER/tb11-geo4niem-arch 

Category: Public Engineering Report 

Editor(s): Jeff Harrison 

Testbed-11 OGC IP Engineering Report Geo4NIEM 
Architecture Design and Implementation Guidance and Fact 

Sheet  
 

Copyright © 2016 Open Geospatial Consortium. 
To obtain additional rights of use, visit http://www.opengeospatial.org/legal/. 

Warning 

This document is not an OGC Standard. This document is an OGC Public Engineering Report 
created as a deliverable in an OGC Interoperability Initiative and is not an official position of the 
OGC membership. It is distributed for review and comment. This document is subject to change 
without notice and may not be referred to as an OGC Standard. Further, any OGC Engineering 
Report should not be referenced as required or mandatory technology in procurements.  

 

 

Document type:  OGC® Engineering Report 
Document subtype: NA 
Document stage:  Approved for public release 
Document language:  English 



OGC 15-051r3  

ii Copyright © 2016 Open Geospatial Consortium. 
 

Contents Page 

1	 Introduction ................................................................................................................... 1	
1.1	 Scope ....................................................................................................................... 1	
1.2	 Sponsoring and Participating organizations ............................................................ 4	

1.2.1	 Sponsoring Organizations ................................................................................. 4	
1.2.2	 Participating Organizations ............................................................................... 4	

1.3	 Document contributor contact points ...................................................................... 5	
1.4	 Future work ............................................................................................................. 5	
1.5	 Foreword ................................................................................................................. 5	

2	 References ..................................................................................................................... 6	
3	 Terms and definitions ................................................................................................... 7	

3.1	 Abbreviated Terms .................................................................................................. 7	
3.2	 Used parts of other documents ................................................................................ 8	

4	 Architecture Development ............................................................................................ 8	
4.1	 Background Considerations .................................................................................... 9	

4.1.1	 IC Data Encoding & Service Specifications ..................................................... 9	
4.1.2	 XML Data Encoding Specification for Information Security Marking 

(ISM) Metadata ............................................................................................ 10	
4.1.3	 XML Data Encoding Specification for Need-To-Know (NTK) Metadata ..... 10	
4.1.4	 XML Data Encoding Specification for Trusted Data Format (TDF) ............. 10	
4.1.5	 IC Enterprise Attribute Exchange Between IC Attribute Services Unified 

Identity Attribute Set (UIAS) ....................................................................... 12	
4.1.6	 NIEM 3.0 ........................................................................................................ 13	
4.1.7	 OGC Web Feature Service (WFS) .................................................................. 14	

4.2	 Geo4NIEM Testbed Architecture ......................................................................... 14	
4.2.1	 Data Encoding Specification ........................................................................... 15	
4.2.2	 Feature Processing API ................................................................................... 17	
4.2.3	 Access Control Framework ............................................................................. 18	

5	 Findings and Recommendations ................................................................................. 21	
5.1	 Combining NIEM, IC security, and OWS is feasible ........................................... 21	
5.2	 Extra effort relative to typical use of Simple Features profile .............................. 22	

5.2.1	 Complex non-spatial properties ...................................................................... 23	
5.2.2	 Multiple namespaces, and DescribeFeatureType ........................................... 24	
5.2.3	 Context-dependent value references in Filter Encodings ............................... 25	

5.3	 Simplifying use of NIEM and IC security and meeting exchange needs ............. 25	
Annex A  Geo4NIEM Testbed 11 Fact Sheet ................................................................... 27	
Annex B  Geo4NIEM Demonstration Scenario and Use Cases ....................................... 31	



OGC 15-051r3 

Copyright © 2016 Open Geospatial Consortium. iii 
 

Revision history ................................................................................................................ 37	
 

Figures Page 
Figure 1 - The NIEM Process ...................................................................................................... 14	

Figure 2 - Development of the NIEM-IC Data Encoding Specification .................................. 16	

Figure 3 - Overview of the NIEM-IC Feature Processing API ................................................ 18	

Figure 4 - Flow Diagram for Access Control (PEPs) in Geo4NIEM ....................................... 20	

Figure 5 - Testbed 11 Demonstration Scenario: Coastal flooding in populated region ......... 31	

  

 

 



OGC 15-051r3  

iv Copyright © 2016 Open Geospatial Consortium. 
 

Abstract 

The goal of the Geo4NIEM thread in Testbed 11 was to assess the potential for the 
National Information Exchange Model (NIEM) to be combined with security tags from 
Intelligence Community (IC) Data Encoding Specifications for information exchange. 
The assessment included reviewing Information Exchange Package Documentation 
(IEPD) populated with relevant content and IC security tags – and then deploying these 
instance documents on Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) standards enabled Web 
Services for testing. The security tags included Information Security Marking Metadata 
(ISM) and Need-to-Know (NTK) Metadata for secure information exchange.  

The assessment included reviewing example IEPDs and performing tests and 
demonstrations using OGC web services, such as Transactional Web Feature Services 
(WFS-T), Policy Enforcement Points (PEPs) and OGC Attribute Stores to process 
geographic feature with NIEM components and security tags. The Test and 
Demonstration included, but was not limited to, feature retrieval and transactions. Results 
were documented in this task to provide a preliminary architecture for Geo4NIEM in 
Testbed 11, and were described in technical detail in other OGC Testbed 11 Engineering 
Reports.   

This document describes background considerations – and an overview of the services, 
data encodings and access control frameworks that compose the Geo4NIEM Testbed 11 
architecture. This document must be reviewed in conjunction with the following Testbed 
11 Geo4NIEM ERs: 

 15-048 Testbed11_Engineering_Report_NIEM-IC Data Encoding Specification 
Assessment and Recommendations 

 15-047 Testbed11_Engineering_Report NIEM-IC Feature Processing API using 
OGC Web Services 

 15-050 Testbed11_Engineering_Report Test and Demonstration Results for 
NIEM using IC Data Encoding Specifications 

 

Business Value 

Geospatial information technologies are increasingly a foundation for supporting 
homeland security, law enforcement, emergency management, and public safety missions 
in the U.S. While these technologies rely upon much of the same data, they are typically 



OGC 15-051r3 

Copyright © 2016 Open Geospatial Consortium. v 
 

developed in silos within a specific mission area. As a result, data duplication and data 
exchange delays occur.  

In addition, many Information Sharing Environment (ISE), Homeland Security (HLS) 
and Law Enforcement (LE) mission partners have developed stand-alone geospatial 
information systems (GIS) or Common Operating Picture (COP)/Situational Awareness 
(SA) applications to support their stakeholder communities during incidents and for daily 
operational support. While different missions, these GIS or COP/SA capabilities rely 
upon much of the same data or generate specific data during an event. The data are often 
stove-piped and not exposed to a broader community that could benefit from these data, 
resulting in duplication and delayed or incorrect decisions. While mission partners do not 
need to use the same GIS or COP/SA tools, they could benefit from shared access to the 
common operating data and services used within these systems if they were exposed and 
exchanged using open standards. 

To meet this challenge, the Program Manager for the Information Sharing Environment 
(PM-ISE) is funding work to enhance NIEM. One focus of these efforts is to enhance 
NIEM’s geospatial exchange capabilities to improve inter-government information 
sharing. Validating and testing the NIEM (Version 3.0) technical architecture related to 
the IC Data Encoding Specifications (i.e. security tags such as ISM, NTK, and TDF), 
aligned to OGC Web Services was identified as a need. Specifically, if the framework’s 
geospatial exchange capability is enhanced with security and standards issued by the 
OGC it will significantly improve inter-government information sharing. 

 

 

Keywords 

ogcdocs, testbed-11, Geo4NIEM, NIEM, WFS, WFS-T, GML, PEP, security, access 
control, ISM, NTK and TDF 

 





OGC® Engineering Report OGC 15-051r3 

 

Copyright © 2016 Open Geospatial Consortium. 1 
 

Testbed-11 OGC IP Engineering Report Geo4NIEM 
Architecture Design and Implementation Guidance and Fact 
Sheet  

1 Introduction 

1.1 Scope 

The focus of the Geo4NIEM thread in OGC Testbed 11 was to assess the potential for 
security tagging and access control from IC Data Encoding Specifications to be combined 
with NIEM for information exchange. The security tags included ISM, NTK and Trusted 
Data Format (TDF) to enable secure information exchange.  The assessment included 
review of real world IEPDs, and this task performed Test and Demonstrations using the 
OGC Transactional Web Feature Service (WFS-T) standard, Policy Enforcement Points 
(PEPs) and OGC Attribute Stores to process GML feature representations leveraging 
NIEM components. Testing and demonstrations included, but were not limited to feature 
retrieval, insert, update and delete. 

This task also identified potential change requests to the OGC WFS standard for handling 
security information in a federated role-based access control environment. These changes 
may help the NIEM/IC transform into more agile and customer-centric frameworks 
driven by collaborative partnerships. This transformation is vital to confronting the 
security challenges of the future. 

This is especially important since geospatial interoperability efforts have matured to a 
point where broad acceptance is now dependent on the capacity to secure information 
exchanges. In fact, organizations that are considering participation in information 
exchanges must also consider how they can establish distributed security frameworks for 
role-based access control to resources. These requirements will continue to increase as 
data access transitions into data management with services like WFS-T where loosely 
affiliated parties collaborate on maintenance of shared situational awareness resources. 

This effort builds on the previous work of the Geo4NIEM Pilot Project. Much of the 
work was focused on the GML (ISO 19136) data exchange standard and the mechanisms 
by which GML and NIEM data could be intermingled. A key driver was to clarify how 
data conforming to one framework could be included or “embedded” in the other using 
various encapsulation strategies. A secondary goal was to conduct various software 
demonstrations in order to assess the feasibility of the various approaches and to explore 
the prospects for making use of fundamental OGC web service standards such as WFS. 



OGC 15-051r3  

2 

    

Copyright © 2016 Open Geospatial Consortium. 
 

Based on the results of the Geo4NIEM Pilot the sponsors of the Geo4NIEM thread in 
Testbed worked with OGC staff to articulate specific functional requirements in order to 
meet the following objectives: 

 Validating the NIEM (Version 3.0) technical architecture related to the IC Data 
Encoding Specifications (i.e. ISM, NTK, and TDF) aligned to OGC Web 
Services, Phase 9 (OWS-9) Testbed related work. 

 Testing and demonstrating use of 1) NIEM 3.0 architecture, and access controls 
and security tagging metadata defined by the IC Data Encoding Specifications 
leveraging OWS-9; and 2) full round tripping of NIEM-conformant information 
exchanges to GML feature(s) and back to a NIEM-conformant information 
exchange. 

 Testing and demonstrating use of an application programming interface (API) for 
operating primarily on GML feature representations leveraging NIEM 
components; features may be searched, retrieved, inserted, updated, and deleted. 

 Reviewing and documenting recommendations to enable full round tripping from 
NIEM-conformant information exchange to Geography Markup Language (GML) 
feature(s) and back to NIEM-conformant information exchange. 

 

To accomplish these objectives, five primary tasks were identified: 

Task 1: NIEM & IC Data Encoding Specification Assessment and Recommendations 

This task assessed the potential for security tagging and access control from the IC Data 
Encoding Specifications to be leveraged with NIEM in support of information exchange. 
The purpose was to determine if the current architecture of NIEM can support IC 
specification alignment. The IC Data Encoding Specifications include but are not limited 
to ISM, NTK and TDF metadata. 

The assessment included review of real world IEPDs, where the Extensible Markup 
Language (XML) schema and NIEM instance documents were populated with relevant 
content and IC security tags.  IEPDs assessed were:  

o Notice of Arrival IEPD1 

o Incidents IEPD 

o Resources IEPD 

                                                

1 For an example: https://mise.mda.gov/drupal/node/24 



OGC 15-051r3 

Copyright © 2016 Open Geospatial Consortium. 3 
 

Recommendations to update these information exchanges were provided to reflect NIEM 
3.0 architecture and included sample information security and dissemination control 
markings. The assessment exercised OGC web services to test NIEM Version 3.0 
conformant IEPDs containing the appropriate IC security markings. Results from this 
task provided a preliminary proposed architecture structure that was tested and 
demonstrated in Task 2. 

This task produced one document: 

o Testbed 11 NIEM IC Data Encoding Specification Assessment and 
Recommendations ER 

 

Task 2: NIEM & IC Data Encoding Specification Test and Demonstration 

This task used preliminary findings and recommended architectures for IC Data 
Encoding Specification support identified in Task 1, and performed a Test and 
Demonstration of the recommended architecture leveraging the results of Testbed 9 and 
previous Geo4NIEM initiatives where appropriate.  Results of this task provided updates 
to the proposed architecture prepared in Task 1.  

Results of this test and demonstration were documented in an Engineering Report 
containing the Findings and Recommendations with reference to refinements to the 
originally proposed architecture prepared in Task 1. 

This task produced one document: 

o Testbed 11 Results of Test and Demonstration of NIEM Using IC Data Encoding 
Specifications ER 

 

Task 3: NIEM-GML-NIEM Round-trip Assessment and Recommendations 

This task assessed the NIEM and GML support for geospatial data exchange round-trip 
workflow process to include: creation, transfer, receipt, modification, return, and 
acceptance of XML content originating as NIEM IEPDs.   

This task produced one document: 

o Testbed 11 NIEM-GML-NIEM Round Trip Assessment and Recommendations 
ER (Preliminary) 

 

Task 4: NIEM-GML-NIEM Round-trip Test and Demonstration 



OGC 15-051r3  

4 

    

Copyright © 2016 Open Geospatial Consortium. 
 

This task used the findings and recommended architecture structure supporting NIEM-
GML-NIEM round-trip assessment identified in Task 3 and performs a Test and 
Demonstration of the recommended architecture.  

This task produced one document: 

o Testbed 11 NIEM-GML-NIEM Round Trip Assessment and Recommendations 
ER (Final) 

 

Task 5: Test and Demonstration of an API for Processing GML Feature Representations  

This task performed Test and Demonstrations using OGC web services, such as Basic 
and Transactional Web Feature Service (WFS-T) and Policy Enforcement Points (PEPs), 
to process GML feature representations leveraging NIEM components. The Test and 
Demonstration included, but are not limited to feature retrieval, insert, update and delete.  

This task produced one document: 

o Testbed 11 NIEM-IC Feature Processing API using OGC Web Services ER. 

 
 

 
1.2 Sponsoring and Participating organizations 

1.2.1 Sponsoring Organizations 

 
Geo4NIEM in Testbed 11 was sponsored by the following organizations: 

o US Department of Homeland Security (DHS) 

1.2.2 Participating Organizations 

The following organizations played one or more roles in Geo4NIEM in Testbed 11 as 
participants (i.e. responded to the RFQ/CFP) 

 
o The Carbon Project 

o Secure Dimensions 

o con terra 

o Jericho Systems 



OGC 15-051r3 

Copyright © 2016 Open Geospatial Consortium. 5 
 

This document also integrates comments and content from MITRE and Safe Software.  

 
 

1.3 Document contributor contact points 

The following participants (listed in alphabetical order by surname) made substantial 
contributions to the content of this report. All questions regarding this document should 
be directed to the editor or any of the contributors. 

Name Organization 

Jan Drewnak con terra 

Rüdiger Gartmann con terra 

Jeff Harrison The Carbon Project 

Dean Hintz Safe Software 

Andreas Matheus Secure Dimensions 

Mark Mattson The Carbon Project 

Scott Renner MITRE 

Tim Schmoyer  Jericho Systems 

 

Many thanks are extended to the reviewers who submitted comments over the course of 
the project. 

1.4 Future work 

Improvements in this document are desirable and will be included based on ongoing 
interoperability engineering activities. 

1.5 Foreword 

Attention is drawn to the possibility that some of the elements of this document may be 
the subject of patent rights. The Open Geospatial Consortium shall not be held 
responsible for identifying any or all such patent rights. 

Recipients of this document are requested to submit, with their comments, notification of 
any relevant patent claims or other intellectual property rights of which they may be 
aware that might be infringed by any implementation of the standard set forth in this 
document, and to provide supporting documentation. 



OGC 15-051r3  

6 

    

Copyright © 2016 Open Geospatial Consortium. 
 

 

2 References 

The following documents are referenced in this document. For dated references, 
subsequent amendments to, or revisions of, any of these publications do not apply. For 
undated references, the latest edition of the normative document referred to applies. 

 Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004 (IRTPA) 

 Guidelines and Requirements in Support of the Information Sharing 
Environment, Presidential Memo, December 2005. 

 Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC), Summary and Recommendations of the 
Geospatial Enhancement for the National Information Exchange Model 
(Geo4NIEM) Interoperability Program Pilot 
(http://www.opengeospatial.org/standards/per) 

 Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC), Geography Markup Language (GML) 
Encoding Standard (http://www.opengeospatial.org/standards/gml)  

 Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC), Web Feature Service (WFS) 
(http://www.opengeospatial.org/standards/wfs ) 

 Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC), Filter Encoding Implementation 
Specification (http://www.opengeospatial.org/standards/filter ) 

 Intelligence Community (IC) Data Encoding Specifications 
(http://www.dni.gov/index.php/about/organization/chief-information-officer/ic-
cio-enterprise-integration-architecture) 

 IC Enterprise Authorization Attribute Exchange between IC Attribute Services, 
Authorization Attribute Set 
(http://www.dni.gov/index.php/about/organization/chief-information-
officer/idam-authorization-attribute-set) 

 XML Data Encoding Specifications for Information Security Marking Metadata 
(http://www.dni.gov/index.php/about/organization/chief-information-
officer/information-security-marking-metadata ) 

 XML Data Encoding Specification for Need-To-Know Metadata 
(http://www.dni.gov/index.php/about/organization/chief-information-
officer/need-to-know-metadata ) 

 XML Data Encoding Specification for Trusted Data Format 
(http://www.dni.gov/index.php/about/organization/chief-information-
officer/trusted-data-format ) 
 

 NIEM Version 3.0 (http://release.niem.gov/niem/3.0) 



OGC 15-051r3 

Copyright © 2016 Open Geospatial Consortium. 7 
 

 NIEM.gov (http://www.niem.gov) 

 Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC), Web Services Common Standard 
(http://www.opengeospatial.org/standards/common ) 

NOTE  The OWS Common Standard contains a list of normative references that are also applicable to 
this Implementation Standard. 

In addition to this document, this report includes several XML Document files as 
specified in Annexes A and B. 

 

3 Terms and definitions 

For the purposes of this report, the definitions specified in the OGC Web Feature Service 
(WFS), the OGC) Filter Encoding Implementation Specification and the OWS Common 
Implementation Standard shall apply. 

 

3.1 Abbreviated Terms 

ABAC Access Based Access Control 

AIXM Aeronautical Information Exchange Model 
API Application Programming Interface 

ARH Access Rights and Handling 
DES Data Encoding Specification 

EDH Enterprise Data Header 
FES Filter Encoding Specification 

GML Geography Markup Language 
HTTP Hypertext Transfer Protocol 

HTTPS Hypertext Transfer Protocol over SSL/TLS 
IC Intelligence Community 

IEPD Information Exchange Package Documentation 
IEP Information Exchange Package 

ISM IC Security Markings 
LDAP Lightweight Directory Access Protocol 

MDA Maritime Domain Awareness 
NIEM National Information Exchange Model 



OGC 15-051r3  

8 

    

Copyright © 2016 Open Geospatial Consortium. 
 

NTK Need to Know 
OGC Open Geospatial Consortium 

OWS OGC Web Services 
PDP Policy Decision Point 

PEP  Policy Enforcement Points  
PM-ISE Program Manager for the Information Sharing Environment 

RFC Request For Comments 
SAML Security Assertion Markup Language 

SSL Secure Sockets Layer 
TDF  Trusted Data Format  

TDO  Trusted Data Objects  
TLS Transport Layer Security 

UAAS Unified Attribute and Authorization Service 
UIAS Unified Identity Attribute Set 

WFS OGC Web Feature Service 
WFS-T OGC Web Feature Service – Transactional 

XLink XML Linking Language 
XML  Extensible Markup Language  

 
 

3.2 Used parts of other documents 

This document uses significant parts of other OGC documents. This report refers to those 
documents by citing section designations, or copies some of those parts with small 
modifications. 

 
 

4 Architecture Development 

This section summarizes background considerations – and the services, data encodings 
and access control frameworks that compose the Geo4NIEM Testbed 11 architecture. 
These sections must be reviewed in conjunction with the following Testbed 11 
Geo4NIEM ERs: 



OGC 15-051r3 

Copyright © 2016 Open Geospatial Consortium. 9 
 

 15-048 Testbed11_Engineering_Report: NIEM-IC Data Encoding Specification 
Assessment and Recommendations 

 15-047 Testbed11_Engineering_Report: NIEM-IC Feature Processing API using 
OGC Web Services 

 15-050 Testbed11_Engineering_Report: Test and Demonstration Results for 
NIEM using IC Data Encoding Specifications 

 

4.1 Background Considerations 

For Testbed 11 Geo4NIEM Thread, three service interfaces, encodings and information 
exchange frameworks were considered during architecture development: 

 IC Data Encoding & Service Specifications 

 NIEM 3.0 

 OGC Web Services, OGC WFS 

 

4.1.1 IC Data Encoding & Service Specifications 

The success of intelligence, defense, homeland security, and law enforcement missions 
are dependent on information producers and consumers being able to share, manage, 
discover, retrieve, and access information across national and international boundaries.  
IC Data Encoding Specifications (DES) are the result of IC collaboration and 
coordination in response to public law, executive orders, policy and guidance, and change 
requests submitted by IC elements. Data encoding specifications define agreed upon 
digital encodings or formats for information being shared or exchanged within the 
enterprise. These specifications should be viewed as component modules. Many of the 
specifications are tightly integrated and dependent on each other. They can be integrated 
into other data encoding specifications or profiled (i.e., configured or constrained) to 
achieve a particular mission or business objective - such as supporting security tagging 
within the NIEM.  

While this flexibility exists, users of the IC Data Encoding Specifications are required to 
maintain conformance to the relevant specification. An instance document is considered 
conformant to an IC DES if it passes all of the normative validation steps. The IC DES 
XML schemas (unless noted otherwise) CVE values from the XML CVE files, and the 
Schematron code version of the constraint rules are normative for the specifications. 

 



OGC 15-051r3  

10 Copyright © 2016 Open Geospatial Consortium. 
 

4.1.2 XML Data Encoding Specification for Information Security Marking (ISM) 
Metadata 

This XML Data Encoding Specification (DES) for Information Security Markings 
(ISM.XML) defines detailed implementation guidance for using XML to encode 
Information Security Markings (ISM) metadata. This DES defines the XML attributes, 
associated structures and relationships, restrictions on cardinality, permissible values, and 
constraint rules for representing electronic information security markings. 

 

4.1.3 XML Data Encoding Specification for Need-To-Know (NTK) Metadata 

This XML Data Encoding Specification (DES) for Need-to-Know Metadata (NTK.XML) 
defines detailed implementation guidance for using XML to encode metadata necessary 
to facilitate automated systems making access control decisions. This DES defines the  
XML elements and attributes, associated structures and relationships, restrictions on 
cardinality, and permissible values for representing access control data concepts using 
XML.  

The metadata, are used to represent the system-specific properties assigned to an 
information resource that will be used, in conjunction with information about the user, 
and possibly other information, to determine the user’s access to the data. A single 
information resource may include multiple occurrences of these metadata in order to 
specify access control information according to multiple, different access systems. 

 

4.1.4 XML Data Encoding Specification for Trusted Data Format (TDF) 

This XML Data Encoding Specification (DES) for Trusted Data Format (IC-TDF.XML) 
defines detailed implementation guidance for using XML to encode IC-TDF data. This 
Data Encoding Specification (DES) defines the XML elements and attributes, associated 
structures and relationships, mandatory and cardinality requirements, and permissible 
values for representing trusted data format data concepts using XML. 

The Intelligence Community (IC) has standardized the various classification and control 
markings established for information sharing within the Information Security Markings 
(ISM), Need-To-Know (NTK), Enterprise Data Header (EDH), and Access Rights and 
Handling (ARH) XML specifications of the Intelligence Community Enterprise 
Architecture (ICEA) Data Standards. The IC-TDF.XML specification further expands on 
this body of work, adapting and extending it as necessary for TDF to function as the IC 
submission format for binding assertion metadata with data resource(s). This TDF 
functionality supports the IC way-ahead strategy of implementing secure cloud-based 
information exchange and discovery on the IC Enterprise 



OGC 15-051r3 

Copyright © 2016 Open Geospatial Consortium. 11 
 

  

 

IC-TDF Dependencies2 

 

The IC-TDF.XML specification has a consistent and simple concept of Assertions and 
Payloads. There are two options for root elements: Trusted Data Object (TDO) and 
Trusted Data Collection (TDC). A TDO contains some data (the payload) and some 
statements about that data (the assertions). In the context of TDF, an ‘assertion’ is defined 
as a statement providing handling, discovery, or mission metadata describing a payload, 
TDO, or TDC, depending on the scope of the assertion. To facilitate handling and access 
control decisions, each TDO and TDC must contain at least one Handling Assertion. A 
Handling Assertion is a special type of structured assertion that contains the IC Enterprise 
Data Header (EDH) for the TDO or payload, providing the attributes needed for policy 
decisions regarding access control and how the data must be handled. ISM and NTK 
markings are contained in Handling Assertions, as part of the Access Rights and 
Handling (ARH) block. Additional discovery and mission assertions may also be 
provided. A TDC contains a list of TDOs (the payload) and some statements about those 
TDOs (the assertions). A TDC may also be a collection of collections, and contain other 
TDCs. 

Each TDO consists of one or more assertions and a payload. Assertions may optionally 
be cryptographically bound to the payload to provide assurance over the integrity of the 
assertion, the payload, and the relationship between the assertion and payload. Each IC-
TDF requires at least one handling assertion, optional discovery and mission assertions, 
and a payload. The handling assertion must consist of a structured IC-EDH block. 
Mission specific metadata may consist of a structured block (XML) or unstructured data 
                                                

2 Graphic provided by the Office of the Director of National Intelligence (ODNI) Office of the Chief Information 
Officer (OCIO) with annotations provided by Defense Information Systems Agency (DISA) and the NIEM Program 
Management Office (PMO). 



OGC 15-051r3  

12 Copyright © 2016 Open Geospatial Consortium. 
 

(binary). The payload may be structured XML, unstructured data, or a reference. A TDC 
consists of a collection of TDOs or TDCs. It is expected but not required that the child 
TDOs and TDCs within a TDC are in some way related, with relationships encoded in the 
TDC assertions. 

Information sharing within the national intelligence enterprise increasingly relies on 
information assurance metadata to allow interagency access control, automated 
exchanges, and appropriate protection of shared intelligence. This requires a structured, 
verifiable representation of security metadata bound to the intelligence data in order for 
the enterprise to become inherently "smarter" about the information flowing in and 
around it. This representation when implemented with other data formats, improved user 
interfaces, and data processing utilities, can provide part of a larger robust information 
assurance infrastructure capable of automating some of the management and exchange 
decisions now requiring human involvement.  These specifications are in operational 
usage outside of the IC currently for other missions such as Defense and Law 
Enforcement.  In Geo4NIEM they have been successfully applied to a disaster 
management scenario.   

 

4.1.5 IC Enterprise Attribute Exchange Between IC Attribute Services Unified Identity 
Attribute Set (UIAS) 

The IC Enterprise Attribute Exchange Between IC Attribute Services Unified Identity 
Attribute Set (UIAS) codifies the minimum set of enterprise-level authorization attributes 
that IC elements are expected to provide if they participate in the Intelligence Community 
Unified Authorization and Attribute Service (UAAS) architecture. It provides a common, 
consistent way to identify IC enterprise authorization attributes of IC persons produced 
by, stored within, or shared throughout the IC’s information domain. The name, 
definition, cardinality, and controlled vocabulary for each attribute are defined in order to 
promote interoperability between UAAS-compliant attribute services established by 
participating Agencies.  
 
Defining the mandatory minimum set of IC enterprise authorization attributes and values 
for sharing through the IC UAAS federation supports consistent and assured information 
sharing across the enterprise. The IC UAAS supports Attribute-Based Access Control 
(ABAC) to promote on-demand access to information and other resources by IC users 
and services, and reduces authorization vulnerabilities by strengthening the access control 
decision process. 
 

IC Enterprise Attribute Exchange Between IC Attribute Services Unified Identity 
Attribute Set (UIAS) specification is implemented by the OGC Attribute Store to define 
the user attributes used for the Testbed 11. While the UIAS specification codifies the 
minimum set of enterprise-level authorization attributes that IC elements are expected to 
provide if they participate in the Intelligence Community Unified Authorization and 



OGC 15-051r3 

Copyright © 2016 Open Geospatial Consortium. 13 
 

Attribute Service (UAAS) architecture, Testbed 11 applies the specification to state and 
local emergency responder participants. These attributes are explicitly used as parameters 
for access to the data assets tagged with NTK.XML. 

 

4.1.6 NIEM 3.0 

NIEM is a standards-based approach to the design of structured information exchange 
specifications. Figure 2 illustrates the process, which is described in reverse order (right 
to left) as follows: Producer and consumer software applications exchange structured 
information in the form of XML documents known as information exchange packages 
(IEPs). Developers of that software understand the expected content of those IEPs by 
understanding the exchange specification, which in NIEM is called an information 
exchange package documentation (IEPD). The designers of the IEPD follow the NIEM 
process, reusing data components from the NIEM data model and extending their 
exchange with new components as needed. The NIEM community [3] creates shared data 
components for those concepts on which they can agree and for which they believe a 
common definition will be useful. 

An IEPD consists of a minimal but complete set of artifacts (XML schemas, 
documentation, sample XML instances, etc.) that defines and describes an implementable 
NIEM information exchange. A complete and conforming IEPD will contain all the 
schema definitions and instructional material necessary to:  

 

 Understand information exchange content, semantics, and structure.  
 Create and validate information exchanges defined by the IEPD.  
 Identify the lineage of the IEPD and optionally its artifacts. 

 



OGC 15-051r3  

14 Copyright © 2016 Open Geospatial Consortium. 
 

consumer
system

IEPD

producer
system IEP

NIEM	
data	model

Domains
Developers

defines
Users

Exchange	
Designersreuse	data	components

specify

Data	exchange	at	runtime

create	data	
components

Prepared by MITRE for OGC  

Figure 1 - The NIEM Process 

 

 

4.1.7 OGC Web Feature Service (WFS) 

The OGC Web Feature Service (WFS) Implementation Specification allows a client to 
retrieve geospatial data encoded in Geography Markup Language (GML) and other 
formats from multiple Web Feature Services. The specification defines interfaces for data 
access and manipulation operations on geographic features, using HTTP as the 
distributed computing platform. Via these interfaces, a Web user or service can combine, 
use and manage geodata -- the feature information behind a map image -- from different 
sources. A Transactional Web Feature Service allows a client to send messages relating 
to making changes to a geospatial database.  

 

4.2 Geo4NIEM Testbed Architecture 

The Testbed 11 Geo4NIEM Architecture has three main elements: 

 NIEM-IC Data Encoding Specification  

 NIEM-IC Feature Processing API  

 Access Control Framework 

 



OGC 15-051r3 

Copyright © 2016 Open Geospatial Consortium. 15 
 

The sections below must be reviewed in conjunction with the following Testbed 11 
Geo4NIEM ERs: 

 15-048 Testbed11_Engineering_Report: NIEM-IC Data Encoding Specification 
Assessment and Recommendations 

 15-047 Testbed11_Engineering_Report: NIEM-IC Feature Processing API using 
OGC Web Services 

 15-050 Testbed11_Engineering_Report: Test and Demonstration Results for 
NIEM using IC Data Encoding Specifications 

 

 

4.2.1 Data Encoding Specification 

As a first step Trusted Data Objects (TDO) including ISM and NTK metadata in XML 
were added to the NIEM IEP documents along with GML feature geometries for testing. 
This process is summarized in the Figure below. The next step in the project was to serve 
the security-tagged NIEM/IC Data Encoding through an OGC Web Feature Service – 
Transactional (WFS-T).   

A key consideration at this phase in the project was that the modular nature of the NIEM 
and IC security tags allows them to be combined in multiple ways to support the needs of 
information exchange. Accordingly, the encoding of the NIEM/IC Data Encoding on 
WFS needed to be flexible and allow for many different types IEP instance documents as 
input. For example, each Homeland Security domain may have many information 
exchanges, each with its own IEP documents for data exchange.  

 



OGC 15-051r3  

16 Copyright © 2016 Open Geospatial Consortium. 
 

gml:member

wfs:FeatureCollection

Operational data 
expressed in NIEM

NIEM 3.0 IEPs w/
ISM and NTK tags

IC Metadata 
expressed as 

ISM, NTK Tags

NIEM and IC
Data Encoding

Geo4NIEM Testbed
Architecture 

outputFormat=NIEMS (for TDF)

 

Figure 2 - Development of the NIEM-IC Data Encoding Specification 

 

To support this flexibility, guiding principles were applied to the development of the 
NIEM/IC Data Encoding. For example, it must support multiple namespaces and 
complex nested schema. It must also be discoverable, self-describing and support 
interactive query and update. Finally, it must support multiple security tagged IEP 
instance documents. The OGC Web Feature Service – Transactional (WFS-T) was 
selected as a template to test the NIEM/IC Data Encoding since it supports all these 
principles.  

Using these principles and WFS-T as a template, the project assessed two ways of 
delivering the data encoding: 

 NIEM IEP containing ISM and NTK metadata as a member of 
wfs:FeatureCollection (called the ‘NIEM/IC WFS’) 

 NIEM IEP with ISM and NTK metadata, appearing as the structured payload in a 
TDO, which in turn is a member of wfs:FeatureCollection. (This encoding was 
made available via the outputFormat parameter called ‘NIEMS’)  



OGC 15-051r3 

Copyright © 2016 Open Geospatial Consortium. 17 
 

 

This approach provided the NIEM/IC WFS as a default option since it was assessed this 
model may be more readily handled by server and client applications during initial 
testing. Three IEPs, Notice of Arrival, Incident and Resource, were converted into 
NIEM/IC wfs:FeatureCollection and tested during hands-on collaborative engineering. 
From that engineering a set of candidate rules were developed to guide the development 
of NIEM/IC Data Encoding in an environment where there may be hundreds of potential 
IEP instance documents, each with security tags. These rules are summarized in other 
ERs as described above. 

See 15-048 Testbed11_Engineering_Report: NIEM-IC Data Encoding Specification 
Assessment and Recommendations for additional detail.  

 

 

4.2.2 Feature Processing API 

In the Testbed 11: Geo4NIEM thread Participants assessed IC Security Markings and 
Need to Know tagging, and how to provide appropriate access control to NIEM IEPs 
served through a Web Feature Service.  

The assessment was conducted by implementing prototype components that use a 
‘NIEM-IC Feature Processing API’ in a functional test environment. Access control was 
conducted via one of several Policy Enforcement Points that filter based upon the user 
attributes stored in the OGC Attribute Store.  

Details on the prototype test environment, test results and demonstration are provided in a 
separate Engineering Report.  

A representation of the key API points for NIEM-IC Feature Processing is provided 
below.  

See 15-047 Testbed11_Engineering_Report: NIEM-IC Feature Processing API using 
OGC Web Services for additional details.  



OGC 15-051r3  

18 Copyright © 2016 Open Geospatial Consortium. 
 

WFS

ISM.XML    NTK.XML

NIEM.XML

Attributes and 
Policies

Clients

PEP

PDP

NIEM/IC Feature Processing

OGC WFS and FES Operations

 

Figure 3 – Overview of the NIEM-IC Feature Processing API 

 

 

4.2.3 Access Control Framework  

A key consideration in the project was describing the implementation of various ISM and 
NTK metadata in NIEM/IC Data Encodings and Service API. A key principal was that 
many different access control frameworks may be implemented on NIEM/IC Data 
Encodings and Services. Common in these approaches is the need to specify, maintain 
and manage roles, groups and policies in a NIEM-IC information exchange – for secure 
data exchange. By specifying Roles, ntk:AccessGroups, ism:classification and 
AccessPolicy PEPs, leveraging attributes defined in alignment of UIAS, can grant access 
to geospatial information exchange resources to some users, limited kinds of access to 
other users, and completely deny access to yet another set of users.  

Each access control rule implemented by a different PEP grants (or denies) requests made 
by an individual or group of individuals, possibly depending on details associated with 
the request. Referring to one or more web services, rules can specify, for a given set of 
users, the conditions under which access is to be granted to them.  A user can be 
associated with roles within an organization or with a group whose membership is known 
throughout the system.  



OGC 15-051r3 

Copyright © 2016 Open Geospatial Consortium. 19 
 

The responsibility for implementing this access control is delegated to the PEP in this 
prototype NIEM/IC information exchange. NIEM/IC API responses and response pass 
through the PEPs, and each access control rule implemented by different PEPs grants (or 
denies) requests made by an individual or group of individuals, depending on the Roles, 
ntk:AccessGroups, ism:classification and AccessPolicy associated with the user making 
the request. 

In addition, because rules will refer to user roles and names, security within NIEM/IC 
information exchange the test and demonstration implementation provides a way to name 
users and mechanisms to manage user identities, including the means by which users can 
be authenticated. A person is authenticated and assumes an identity by demonstrating 
knowledge of a secret (such as a password), or possession of some other information, that 
is associated with that identity.   

NIEM/IC information exchange has a flexible authentication framework that supports 
multiple authentication methods. To authenticate a user known to an organization, and 
uses systems already used to authenticate users.  This allows an organization to use 
existing authentication methods. For example, a user might be authenticated at an 
organization by providing a username/password (HTTP AUTH) that is recognized in the 
organization, or via X.509 certificates.  

Key within this test and demonstration implementation is the OGC Attribute Store. The 
OGC Attribute Store implements the IC Enterprise Attribute Exchange Between IC 
Attribute Services Unified Identity Attribute Set (UIAS) specification. The specification 
documents a set of IC enterprise identity attributes and associated values that are required 
for participation in Intelligence Community Unified Authorization and Attribute Service 
(UAAS) architecture. Information about user and role assignment is stored in an LDAP. 
The data can be accessed via the OGC IdP Attribute Service interface. 

With this access control framework in place the project also assessed how the principals 
of Attribute Based Access Control (ABAC) may be applied to NIEM/IC information 
exchange. ABAC is an access control method where subject requests to perform 
operations on objects are granted or denied based on assigned attributes of the subject, 
assigned attributes of the object, environment conditions, and a set of policies that are 
specified in terms of those attributes and conditions. Attributes are characteristics of the 
subject, object, or environment conditions. Attributes contain information given by a 
name-value pair. A subject is a human user or NPE, such as a device that issues access 
requests to perform operations on objects. Subjects are assigned one or more attributes. 
An object is a system resource for which access is managed by the ABAC system, such 
as devices, files, records, tables, processes, programs, networks, or domains containing or 
receiving information. An operation is the execution of a function at the request of a 
subject upon an object. Operations include read, write, edit, delete, copy, execute, and 
modify. Policy is the representation of rules or relationships that makes it possible to 



OGC 15-051r3  

20 Copyright © 2016 Open Geospatial Consortium. 
 

determine if a requested access should be allowed, given the values of the attributes of 
the subject, object, and possibly environment conditions.3 

The access control portions of the Geo4NIEM architecture are shown in the 
representational flow diagram below. 

 

Client

GetCapabilities() :service metadata

DescribeFeatureType() :type description

GetFeature() :feature instances

DataStore

Content

NIEM/IC 
WFS

Transaction() :InsertUpdateDeletefeatures

PEP

Transactions

HTTP AUTH
EndPoints

X509 Cert
EndPoints

Prepared by The Carbon Project for OGC Use

Policies and 
Attributes

 

Figure 4 – Flow Diagram for Access Control (PEPs) in Geo4NIEM 

 

                                                

3 Guide to Attribute Based Access Control (ABAC) Definition and Considerations 
http://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/specialpublications/NIST.sp.800-162.pdf 



OGC 15-051r3 

Copyright © 2016 Open Geospatial Consortium. 21 
 

See 15-050 Testbed11_Engineering_Report: Test and Demonstration Results for NIEM 
using IC Data Encoding Specifications for additional details.  

 

5 Findings and Recommendations 

The evidence obtained through the Testbed 11:Geo4NIEM testing and demonstration 
supports three main findings:   

 First, with reasonable effort it is possible to combine NIEM, IC security 
specifications, OGC Web Service components, and GML-aware clients to support 
information exchange with authorized users.  

 Second, implementing such an exchange requires extra work, compared to a 
typical exchange of features that conform to the GML Simple Features profile. 
However, this level of effort is not greater than encodings already in OGC, such 
as Aeronautical Information Exchange Model (AIXM), where a community of 
interest has defined a standard GML application schema for exchanging 
geographic data.  

 Finally, it is possible to simplify the implementation of NIEM and IC security 
specifications and still meet information exchange needs. This simplification can 
reduce the technical overhead required to broadly implement secure information 
exchanges and emerging collaborative partnerships. Simplification options 
include NIEM IEPD development guidance or recommended practices that reduce 
the impact of generating excessive namespaces. 

The following sections describe these findings and any associated recommendations.  

 

5.1 Combining NIEM, IC security, and OWS is feasible 

The demonstration used real-world NIEM IEPs, containing embedded GML elements, 
properly tagged with IC access control and security metadata, and optionally enclosed 
within the IC's dissemination format for binding assertion metadata with data resources 
(i.e. IC-TDF.XML/TDO).. The demonstration was constructed using a cloud-based WFS 
server, multiple Policy Enforcement Points that provide access controls and filters based 
upon the user attributes stored in the OGC Attribute Store and multiple GML-aware 
clients. Major OGC operations in a simulated distributed information exchange were 
assessed including: 

 WFS server with GetCapabilities, DescribeFeatureType, GetFeature, and 
Transaction operations 



OGC 15-051r3  

22 Copyright © 2016 Open Geospatial Consortium. 
 

 Access control engines enforcing access policy based on user attributes and IC 
metadata attributes in the WFS FeatureCollection payload 

 Clients interpreting the WFS FeatureCollection elements and performing 
transaction operations 

 

NIEM 3.0 was compatible with the IC security, access control and dissemination (ISM, 
NTK, and TDF) and supported the access control policies for the demonstration scenario. 
There is no evidence to suggest incompatibility with more complex policies, schemas and 
security markings. Access control engines can work with NIEM/IC Data Encoding, with 
or without the NIEM/IC Feature Processing API. 

The participants spent most of their time learning about the NIEM exchange 
specifications and the IC security specifications. Implementation of the second and third 
information exchanges (based on Incident and Resource IEPs)  took less development 
time since specialized tools were created to speed the ‘cloning’ of the first WFS instance 
(based on the Notice of Arrival IEP). 

 

Recommendation 1:  Develop, test and demonstrate tools that clone and adjust data 
elements of WFS instances of NIEM/IC Data Encodings to simplify and speed 
development and deployment of service-based information exchanges. Assess tools that 
promote export of NIEM/IC Data Encodings. 

 

Recommendation 2:  Assess how IC security specifications (ISM, NTK, and TDF) may 
further enable WFS and GML-based data exchange. 

 

5.2 Extra effort relative to typical use of Simple Features profile 

The GML Simple Features profile defines fixed coding patterns for the use of a subset of 
XML Schema and GML constructs. It is intended to address the case where a client 
interacts with a previously unknown server offering. This is the typical case for many 
OWS components. Relative to that typical case, the demonstration implementation for the 
NIEM/IC Feature Processing API and NIEM/IC Data Encoding (Testbed 11 ER 15-048) 
required extra effort in three areas: complex non-spatial properties, multiple namespaces 
and DescribeFeatureType, and context-dependent value references in filter encodings. 

 



OGC 15-051r3 

Copyright © 2016 Open Geospatial Consortium. 23 
 

5.2.1 Complex non-spatial properties 

Information exchanges implementing the draft NIEM/IC Feature Processing API required 
schemas in wfs:FeatureCollections roughly equivalent to those that comply with level 
SF-2 for GMLsf.  This finding means that some current WFS and GML applications and 
services expecting GMLsf Level 0 or 1 tools may not able to fully operate with the 
NIEM/IC Feature Processing API ‘out of the box’.  This finding also means that 
exporting NIEM/IC Data Encoding from a WFS implementing NIEM/IC Feature 
Processing API may not be possible in common GIS formats such as Shapefiles. 

The SF-0 profile does not allow complex non-spatial properties, while these are permitted 
but unusual in the SF-1 profile. This simplicity can be exploited in server and client 
software, allowing off-the-shelf components to handle new application schemas with 
little or no special effort. However, this simplicity is not present in the NIEM/IC Feature 
Processing API and NIEM/IC Data Encoding. For example, the Notice of Arrival IEPD 
defines a complex property with six levels of nested elements, resulting in data like this: 

 

<mda:Vessel ...> 
  <m:VesselAugmentation ...> 
    <m:VesselCallSignText>H3LP</m:VesselCallSignText> 
    <m:VesselCargoCategoryText>Harmful Substances ... 
    <m:VesselCategoryText>Container Ship ... 
    <m:VesselCDCCargoOnBoardIndicator>true ... 
    <m:VesselCharterer ...> 
      <nc:EntityOrganization> 
        <nc:OrganizationLocation> 
          <nc:Address> 
            <nc:LocationCountryISO3166Alpha2Code>KR ... 
          </nc:Address> ... 

 

From the perspective of an Information Exchange designer or implementer, this level of 
complexity may require effort in the WFS server implementations when compared with 
less extensive SF-0 and SF-1 schemas, especially when implementing the WFS-T 
functions. It also requires extra effort in the client applications, where specialized Filter 
Encodings using XPath expressions are necessary to retrieve values from the complex 
properties. This extra effort can be reduced by careful NIEM-conformant IEPD design.  
Instead of using all available NIEM objects, designers can carefully construct IEPD 
schemas using just enough NIEM objects to meet the community's information exchange 
need. 

 

Recommendation 3:  Develop and test a Best Practice that defines more limited, but useful, 
subsets of NIEM schema components (including location as GML), with required IC DES 



OGC 15-051r3  

24 Copyright © 2016 Open Geospatial Consortium. 
 

components, to lower the ‘implementation bar’ of time and resources required for developing 
software that supports the NIEM/IC Feature Processing API. By lowering the level of 
effort, Information Exchange designers, geospatial developers and access control software 
implementers will be encouraged to take greater advantage of the rich functionality in 
NIEM/IC. The Best Practice should be designed around the business elements needed by 
Information Exchange Designers. 

 

 

5.2.2 Multiple namespaces, and DescribeFeatureType 

The WFS DescribeFeatureType operation returns an XML Schema document containing 
a complex type definition for the specified feature type.  In order to form a complete 
schema, the client must then either retrieve or already possess a separate schema 
document for each imported namespace.  This is essential for WFS servers and GML 
clients implemented with validating parsers.  On the other hand, implementations based 
on non-validating parsers do not need the schema and do not rely on 
DescribeFeatureType.  Both approaches were tested in Testbed 11 Geo4NIEM Thread. 

For application schemas conforming to the Simple Features profile, implementing the 
DescribeFeatureType operation is relatively simple.  These schemas typically define 
features within a single namespace, and clients usually have schema documents for the 
imported GML namespaces. 

Implementing the DescribeFeatureType operation for the NIEM/IC Feature Processing 
API is more complicated.  The schema for such a feature type will have many 
namespaces, and clients may not always have the corresponding schema document.  This 
can greatly complicate the implementation of the DescribeFeatureType operation. 

Two aspects of NIEM IEPDs may be exploited in future work to reduce much of this 
complexity.  A conforming IEPD contains the complete set of schema documents. It also 
contains a set of OASIS XML Catalog files providing a mapping between namespace 
URI and schema document file name.  A WFS server could use the catalog to rewrite 
every <import> schema element so that the schemaLocation attribute resolves to a 
schema document on the server.     

Recommendation 4:  Develop, test and demonstrate the feasibility of making schemas 
available from WFS implementing the NIEM/IC Feature Processing API. This may or 
may not be part of the DescribeFeatureType operation so PEPs can create filter rules 
based upon them. This recommendation may also include assessing methods by which 
PEPs may process security tag information from the DescribeFeatureType.  

 



OGC 15-051r3 

Copyright © 2016 Open Geospatial Consortium. 25 
 

Recommendation 5:  Assess, develop, test and demonstrate governance methods to 
provide complete sets of public-accessible schema document. In particular, assess 
methods to assist IEPD developers in maintaining and accessing schemas. 

 

5.2.3 Context-dependent value references in Filter Encodings 

From the perspective of an OGC software developer or user the nested structure in the 
data encodings associated with the NIEM/IC Feature Processing API means 
implementing fully capable OGC Filter Encodings for WFS will require a subset of 
XPath.  For example, the Notice of Arrival NIEM IEPD describes data like this: 

<m:VesselDOCCertificate> 
  <nc:DocumentExpirationDate> 
    <nc:Date>2028-04-24T00:00:00</nc:Date> 
  </nc:DocumentExpirationDate> 
  <nc:CertificateIssueDate> 
    <nc:Date>2026-03-11T00:00:00</nc:Date> 
  </nc:CertificateIssueDate> 

 

XPath is required to distinguish between the nc:Date of document expiration and 
certificate issue. There is a similar context dependency in NTK, where XPath is required 
to distinguish between the ntk:AccessGroupList element within 
ntk:RequiresAnyOf, and the same element within ntk:RequiresAllOf . 
Therefore, the use of either NIEM or IC security requires Filter processing with XPath 
enabled. 

XPath is accounted for in the Filter Encoding specification, but it is a specialized case 
and not as broadly implemented as the standard spatial, logical and comparison operators 
of WFS. 

Recommendation 6:  Develop, test and demonstrate the feasibility of fully capable OGC 
Filter Encodings for WFS using a subset of XPath. This approach provides the potential 
for high fidelity queries on the NIEM/IC Feature Processing API in support of mission 
and community requirements.  

 

5.3 Simplifying use of NIEM and IC security and meeting exchange needs  

The extra effort required to implement the NIEM/IC Feature Processing API is not 
unique to either of those standards. It is common in situations where a community of 
interest has defined a standard GML application schema for exchanging geographic data, 
and presumes understanding on the part of all community participants. For example, the 



OGC 15-051r3  

26 Copyright © 2016 Open Geospatial Consortium. 
 

Aeronautical Information Exchange Model (AIXM) provides a standard GML 
application schema for aeronautical information exchange. This application schema 
defines many complex non-spatial properties, uses multiple namespaces, and includes 
context-dependent element values. Implementing AIXM-based exchanges with off-the-
shelf components requires the same sort of extra effort needed for the NIEM/IC 
encoding. For example, the Gaia client requires a special "AIXM extender" in order to 
process AIXM data. 

This extra effort can be reduced by careful NIEM-conformant IEPD design.  Instead of 
using all available NIEM objects designers can carefully construct IEPD schemas using 
just enough NIEM objects to meet the community's information exchange need.  It may 
be possible to satisfy a large set of information exchange needs with a simple "what, 
where, when" IEPD that approaches the Simple Feature profile, using reduced nesting 
and a subset of location designations and security tags. 

Achieving broad implementation of these approaches will make it possible for the 
NIEM/IC Feature Processing API to support emerging agile information exchanges 
driven by collaborative partnerships. This transformation is vital to confronting the 
security challenges of the future. 

Recommendation 7:  Develop, test, and demonstrate the feasibility of a ‘Generic’ NIEM-
conformant IEPD with location, time, what, who information as ‘core’ elements in simple 
GMLsf. 

 

Recommendation 8:  Develop, test and demonstrate the feasibility of a generic GML 
Application Schema leveraging NIEM-conformant components and IC specification 
components. This would extend the usefulness of NIEM components from an OGC 
implementation stand-point within a particular community of interest. 



OGC 15-051r3 

Copyright © 2016 Open Geospatial Consortium. 27 
 

Annex A 
 

Geo4NIEM Testbed 11 Fact Sheet 

This section provides a brief Fact Sheet4 on Testbed 11 Geo4NIEM Thread. 

 

Background 

n Geo4NIEM is an Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) initiative examining 
how NIEM can works with OGC standards like GML 

n The first round of Geo4NIEM concluded in 2013,  
demonstrating that 

– NIEM information exchange packages (IEPs) 
can include GML-based data components 

– GML documents can include NIEM-based data components 

n The current round is part of OGC Testbed-11, ending now 

– Engineering reports are nearly done; no major changes expected 

n Testbed results show that combining NIEM, IC Security,  
and OGC Web Services (OWS) is feasible 

 

 

OGC Testbed 11 

n Testbeds operate at the lowest level of maturity among the OGC 
interoperability initiatives 

– Agree on a demonstration scenario 

– Participants connect existing products into a working demo 

– Demonstration experience informs the engineering reports 

                                                

4 Adapted from July 24 Geo4NIEM ESDP 



OGC 15-051r3  

28 Copyright © 2016 Open Geospatial Consortium. 
 

– ERs feed into the standards program and other processes 

 

You are here
 

 

 

Geo4NIEM Tasks 

1. Assess support in NIEM for IC security specifications  
(ISM, NTK, TDF), and recommend a security architecture 

2. Demonstrate secure information exchange using architecture from task 1 

3. Assess NIEM and GML support for geospatial data exchange from NIEM-
based client to GML-based client and back  
(round-trip); recommend a round-trip architecture 

4. Demonstrate round-trip geospatial data exchange using the architecture 
from task 3 

5. Demonstrate OGC Web Feature Service (WFS) on GML feature 
representations with embedded NIEM components 

6. Analysis/study to reach consistent security approach across the OGC suite of 
service standards 

Architecture and Demo Sequence 



OGC 15-051r3 

Copyright © 2016 Open Geospatial Consortium. 29 
 

TDO

payload

handling 
assertion

other 
metadata

WFS
PEP

policy store

user attribute store 
(UIAS conforming)

Clients

features
2

3

5

4 6 7

8

9

1

ISM

ISM

NTK

NIEM 
IEP

request

IEP information exchange package
PDP policy decision point
PEP policy enforcement point
TDO trusted data object
WFS web feature service

PDP

 

 

Findings 

 

n With reasonable effort it is possible to combine NIEM, IC security 
specifications, OGC Web Service components, and GML-aware clients to 
support information exchange with authorized users 

– Access control engines can work with NIEM/IC data encoding, with or 
without a services framework 

n Implementing such a data exchange requires extra work, compared to a 
typical exchange of features that conform to the GML Simple Features 
profile 

– This level of effort is not greater than encodings already in OGC, like 
AIXM, where a community of interest has defined a standard GML 
application schema for exchanging geographic data 

n Careful IEPD design can simplify the exchange implementation, reducing the 
technical overhead required to broadly implement secure information 
exchanges and emerging collaborative partnerships 

 



OGC 15-051r3  

30 Copyright © 2016 Open Geospatial Consortium. 
 

Recommendations for Future Work 

n Tools and best practices for exposing NIEM IEPs through the OGC Web 
Feature Service interface 

– Includes making IEPD schemas available via WFS 

n Tools and best practices for expressing and enforcing  
access control policy in terms of IC security metadata 

n Best practice for simplified IEPDs 

– Location and time core elements in GML Simple Features profile 

– Model similar to Cursor-on-Target (CoT) 

 

Conclusion  

 

n SUCCESS: NIEM 3.0, IC security, and OGC Web Services 
will work together 

n Results have limited maturity 

– Nothing resembling an operational environment in terms of message 
variety and load 

– Need follow-on work to examine more questions and  
collect more evidence before we can create best practices 

n Follow-on work may lead to  

– Guidance on when to use NIEM, when to use GML, 
when and how to use both 



OGC 15-051r3 

Copyright © 2016 Open Geospatial Consortium. 31 
 

Annex B 
 

Geo4NIEM Demonstration Scenario and Use Cases 

The work done in the Geo4NIEM thread and benefits gained by the technology were 
demonstrated in simulated real-world scenarios. This section describes the Use Cases and 
Demonstration results.  

 

Scenario 

To support national climate-change preparedness OGC’s Testbed 11 demonstrated 
technology based on the scenario of spatial information needed when a population is 
displaced due to coastal inundation. To support this objective the Testbed 11 
Demonstration Scenario was coastal flooding in densely populated region.  

 

 

Figure 5 - Testbed 11 Demonstration Scenario: Coastal flooding in densely populated region 

 

In this environment many communities need to coordinate, including: 

 First Responders 



OGC 15-051r3  

32 Copyright © 2016 Open Geospatial Consortium. 
 

 Law Enforcement 

 Emergency Management 

 Govt Decision Makers 

 NGOs 

 Military Support Personnel 

 Intelligence Community 

 

Geo4NIEM Use Cases 

The vignettes below are the portions of the June 4th Demonstration at the OGC Boulder 
TC meeting that were used to explain work done in the Geo4NIEM thread.  

 

Use Case #2 – Maritime Domain Awareness Event  

Use Case #2 – Maritime Domain Awareness event by Port Authority, USCG and civilian 
merchant vessels to sortie from San Francisco Harbor/Bay in view of increasing flooding 
and impending tropical storm. 

Title: San Francisco Port Authority advises seaworthy merchant vessels to sortie from SF 
Bay for open ocean or safe havens. 

Description:  Using the National Information Exchange Model (NIEM 3.0) the Maritime 
Domain Awareness packages augmented with geospatial location using OGC GML and 
Information Communities Security Markings for Role-based Access Control, the United 
States Coast Guard queries the NIEM conformant information exchange Notice of 
Arrival messages to determine what vessels are scheduled to be in the Bay Region within 
the next two weeks.   

By including GML features into NIEM 3.0, and serving these messages via an OGC Web 
Feature Service, spatial and other filters can be invoked to receive a list of vessels that 
will be within the region (and with certain criteria).  This allows the Port Authority to 
focus in on the ships that they really need to work with to get them to a safe position.   

Some of the Notice of Arrival information is classified such as cargo type, some of this 
information might even be “top secret”, and the system cannot pass this information 
around to others, especially for cross-jurisdictional purposes, but they do need the 
minimum set of information for each feature in question.   



OGC 15-051r3 

Copyright © 2016 Open Geospatial Consortium. 33 
 

In order to accomplish this, Participants tagged the message fields with security tags that 
are filtered through the security policy enforcement points that are proxying the Web 
Feature Server.    These PEPs are checking the attribute store to provide that role-based 
access based upon OASIS’s SAML specification. Some PEPs are able to limit or allow 
access based upon the geographic location of the user. 

 

Geo4NIEM Use Case 2 – Demonstration Example 

The following examples provide a brief overview of the Testbed 11 Geo4NIEM 
demonstration Use Case #2, Maritime Domain Awareness, as described above. 

 

 

 



OGC 15-051r3  

34 Copyright © 2016 Open Geospatial Consortium. 
 

 

 

Use Case #4 - Mutual Aid / Evacuation 

 

Use Case #4 - Mutual Aid / Evacuation of municipal hospital by National Guard air 
assets and coordination with local air traffic control  

Title: Evacuation of a municipal hospital requiring mutual aid and National Guard  

Description: Here we are using NIEM 3.0 for Mutual Aid and the Incident and Resource 
messages to provide situational awareness for cross-jurisdictional information sharing. 
The messages that are being exchanged through the OGC Web Feature Service – 
Transactional, and have OGC GML features and Information Communities security 
markings. Again the messages are being filtered to provide only the appropriate level of 
classified data based upon the users security attributes.  

Due to the flooding in the area and the proximity to the bay, the area around Pier 90 has 
lost power, Pacific Gas and Electric has been spread thin, units are coming from other 
states to help, but it is estimated to be days before crews can restore power to this sector. 
It is now reported that the backup generator at the Bayview Child Health Center has 
blown and its patients are in need of immediate evacuation. Eighteen of the 46 beds are in 
need of Air Medivac. The Hospital shares one Lifeline Helicopter with the California 
Pacific Medical Center.  

There are limited resources in the area due to all the responses that are in progress 
throughout the Bay Area. After the evacuation order has been given the Emergency 
Operations Center will need to notify others in the region of the incident, and request air 
resources to assist in the Air Ambulance evacuation from the National Guard and others.  



OGC 15-051r3 

Copyright © 2016 Open Geospatial Consortium. 35 
 

Knowing the geographical location of specific resources is now easier with the inclusion 
of OGC GML into the NIEM documents that allow for spatial filtering through the Web 
Feature Service.  

The back and forth nature of requesting resources and receiving responses regarding 
those resources stresses the requirements for the creation, search and retrieve, edit and 
update, and deletion of NIEM instance documents. 

 

Geo4NIEM Use Case 4 – Demonstration Example 

The following examples provide a brief overview of the Testbed 11 Geo4NIEM 
demonstration Use Case #4, Mutual Aid, described above. 

 

Emergency Ops Center…

“Evacuation needed at 
the Bay Health Center…”

 

EOC | User | asmith

asmith
adds
Incident
Info via WFS-T…

 



OGC 15-051r3  

36 Copyright © 2016 Open Geospatial Consortium. 
 

Coast Guard | User| mqueralt

Apond gets 
Incident info… 
and dispatches 
helicopters

 

 

 

 



OGC 15-051r3 

Copyright © 2016 Open Geospatial Consortium. 37 
 

Revision	history	
Date Release Editor Primary clauses 

modified 
Description 

2013-05-14 02 J Harrison All Initial draft project deliverable. 

2015-07-17 03 J Harrison All Abstract, Introduction, Graphics, and Findings 
updated based on TB11 test and demo 
activities  

2015-09-19 04 J Harrison All Sponsor and Participant edits.  

2015-10-12 05 J Harrison All Sponsor and Participant edits.  

2015-9-14  C. Reed Various Final edits prior to publication. 

 


